File 
Kathmandu, January 26
Santoshi Shrestha has won a gold medal with a national record in the Bangabandhu Sheikh Mujib Dhaka Marathon held in Dhaka, Bangladesh. She completed the prescribed distance in 2 hours 46 minutes 22 seconds and won gold.
She has previously broken the record of 2 hours 48 minutes 02 seconds held by Nepal’s Pushpa Bhandari and set a new record. This competition is the debut marathon of Shrestha, who has been running in middle distance before.
Shrestha is the gold winner of the 13th South Asian Games (SAG) in athletics 10,000 meters race held in Kathmandu four years ago.
Bhandari came second in the Bangabandhu Sheikh Mujib Dhaka Marathon. She completed it in 2 hours 49 minutes 34 seconds. She is the gold winner of the last edition of the Dhaka Marathon.
Similarly, Khadag Bahadur Khadka came third in the men’s competition. He took 2 hours 18 minutes 32 seconds to complete.
On the women’s side, Bindradhanke Shrestha finished fifth. She took 3 hours and 4 minutes.
Out of seven players from Nepal, three men and four women participated, two women and one man won medals.
Kathmandu, January 21
Nepal lost to New Zealand by 64 runs in their first match of the ICC U19 World Cup in East London, South Africa on Sunday.
Chasing 303 runs to win, Nepal could only manage to reach 238/9 in their allotted 50 overs.
Arjun Kumar top-scored for Nepal with 90 hitting 12 boundaries. Similarly, Captain Dev Khanal contributed 36 followed by 13 from Subhash Bhandari and 17 by Tilak Bhandari.
New Zealand’s Mason Clarke took three wickets while Ewald Schreuder and Oscar Jackson took two wickets each followed by one wicket each by Matt Rowe and Jack Coming.
Before this, winning the toss and opting to bat first in the Buffalo Park Cricket Stadium, New Zealand had posted a target of 303 runs at the loss of eight wickets in 50 overs. Snehith Reddy was impressive with the bat as he put on 147 runs in 124 balls.
Captain Oscar Jackson and Reddy combined for a partnership of 157 runs for the fourth wicket taking New Zealand to an impressive score. Jackson scored 75 runs off 81 balls.
For Nepal, Subash Bhandari took three wickets followed by two from Gulsan Jha and one each from Tilak Raj Bhandari and Akash Tripathi.
Nepal will take on Pakistan on Wednesday.
Kathmandu, January 21 
Nepal are playing their first match of the U19 World Cup today as they take on New Zealand at the Buffalo Park cricket ground in East London, South Africa.
The team qualified for the U19 Cricket World dramatically by beating the UAE in a nail-biter in March 2, 2023.
Led by Dev Khanal, the team includes Aakash Chand, Tilak Bhandari, Bishal Bikram KC, Dipak Bohara, Deepak Bohra, Hemant Dhami, Deepak Dumre, Gulshan Jha, Dipesh Kandel, Arjun Kumal, Uttam Magar and Bipin Rawal.
A total of 16 countries are taking part in the tournament organised by the International Cricket Council. Nepal is in Group D along with New Zealand, Pakistan and Afghanistan.
The match starts at 1:45 pm this afternoon. 
The tournament that started on January 19 will end with the final match to be held on February 11.
Photo: NSJF
Kathmandu, January 19
The 20th edition of the NSJF-Pulsar Sports Award is going to be organised at Hotel Yak and Yeti, Kathmandu.
Hotel Yak and Yeti is the hospitality partner for this edition according to a press statement released by Nepal Sports Journalists Forum (NSJF).
An agreement between Hotel’s General Manager Monika Scheiblauer and NSJF’s President Durganath Subedi has been signed for the same.
The award ceremony is scheduled for February 11.
Kathmandu, January 19
The ICC Under 19 Men’s Cricket World Cup kicked off on January 19 in South Africa. This is the 15th edition of the U-19 Men’s Cricket World Cup.
Four associate nations are competing in the U-19 World Cup along with the youth teams of 12 test nations.
Two matches are being played today in the World Cup. A match will be between Ireland and America in Group A and South Africa and West Indies in Group B.
The final match will be held on February 11.
Nepal is also returning to the U-19 World Cup after eight years. Nepal will play the first match against New Zealand on Sunday.
Rinchhen Moktan and Bina Mani Younjan
Rinchhen Moktan and Bina Mani Younjan, aged 18 and 17 respectively, are emerging talents in the Nepali basketball scene.
With many calling them the future of Nepali basketball, the two are excelling in different formats of the game. Moktan was part of Nepal’s women’s basketball team that took part in the Asian Games in China while Younjan made her full-court debut during the 2023 SABA Women’s Basketball Championship.
Recently, the two helped Budhanilkantha Basketball Club win the U19 Women National Basketball Championship organized by the National Basketball Association with Moktan even earning the coveted title of most valuable player (MVP).
“I was so happy to be part of the winning team and be dubbed the MVP in the U19 championship that was held after ages, ” says Moktan.
Now, the two hope that more tournaments are held in the country so they can raise their game as they hope to prepare well for international tournaments. They believe that this aspect is currently lacking in their preparation and is essential for them to compete with other countries on the global stage.
“We both played internationally for Nepal and found the domestic matches easy. The more we play the better we will get as players and for that, matches are crucial,” says Moktan.
Moktan primarily plays as the point guard. This is considered one of the most important positions in the sport as a point guard acts as a floor general. Understanding that she has been learning and trying to improve as she hopes to play many games for Nepal.
“I also play as a shooting guard but I love playing the point,” she says.
The two have played a match each for the national women’s team, albeit in different formats. Having debuted in their teens, they are eager to make the most of these opportunities and contribute to the team.
Building chemistry in the domestic scene
Rinchhen Moktan and Bina Mani Younjan
Both Moktan and Younjan are teammates in the domestic scene, initially playing for the Nepal Police Club. They have been consistently playing together on various teams. 
Their basketball journey began in school, with Younjan starting hers at Rupy’s International School, where she was introduced to the sport by Mabindra Chhetri, a member of the national men’s team.
Younjan was not comfortable when she started but with time and thanks to her teammates, she started to learn the game and get better. 
“I picked it up quite quickly. This is thanks to the senior members of my team,” she says.
Upon completing her Secondary Education Examination (SEE), Younjan joined Premier College and joined its basketball team. Currently, in the 12th grade, she and her team have won a tournament that featured both home and away formats.
However, Moktan’s road is different as she lived and breathed the sport since her early teens. Her love for basketball started when she was in grade 8. Her passion for basketball led her to join Trungram International Academy, where basketball was a major extra-curricular activity.
“I went to TIA for basketball. Then I heard that Anusha Malla and Shreya Khadka also play for TIA. There was a good environment for basketball,” Moktan says.  
Currently, Moktan, Younjan, Malla, and Khadka are teammates. Moktan played in the 3×3 basketball during the Asian Games under Khadka’s captaincy.
Since Moktan and Younjan have been playing together, the two have developed a chemistry. As Moktan runs the point, Younjan plays as a forward. They know when to cut in and when to hold back as the duo has been causing their opponents some major troubles.
“We have played together for various clubs, so there is proper coordination among us,” says Moktan. 
No I in ‘TEAM’
They understand how basketball is a team game and that they need to have each other’s back. Their bond is such that they try to cover for each other’s mistakes as well.
Both feel that the sport has changed the way they see life. It has improved their personal growth and even changed their lifestyle to some extent.
“It’s given us confidence and helped us build our character,” says Moktan.
As the game has given them a name, they hope they can work together in creating history for the country. The only way to do that is by winning medals.
“We dream big,” says Moktan.
Younjan believes if they can do that, they will be able to take Nepali women’s basketball to new heights.
Coach of national women’s basketball Bikash Shahi says it is possible too as he sees great potential in Moktan and Younjan.  
“They have what it takes to uplift the Nepali women’s basketball scene,” says Shahi.  
Moktan, who has played in 3×3 basketball, now wants to transition to full-court basketball for Nepal. However, both express concern about the irregularity of games, highlighting that consistent gameplay is essential for their development.
“We do not participate to lose. Although we can’t win, in every international match we learn something new,” says Younjan. “But for us to compete even harder, we need to play more games.”
Kathmandu, January 18
Nominations for the People’s Choice Award under the NSJF-Pulsar Sports Award 2079 have been announced on Wednesday. 
The award is presented every year by the Nepal Sports Journalists Forum (NSJF).
The nominees for the 20th edition of the awards to be held on February 11 are footballer Anant Tamang, karate player Biplavlal Shrestha, volleyball player Niruta Thagunna, table tennis player Sikka Suwal Shrestha and body builder Rajni Shrestha.
Athletes are nominated in this category based on their success and popularity in the field of sports, said Durganath Subedi, the president of NSJF. 
The winner of this category will be based on popular vote, Forum Members’ Vote, Social Media (NSJF Pulsar Sports Awards Official Facebook Page and Pulsar Nepal Official Page) vote and vote by Head Coaches of 27 different Sports.
Other categories of Pulsar Sports Awards 2079 include Best Male Athlete of the Year, Best Female Athlete of the Year, Best Coach of the Year, Best Young Player and Para-Athlete Award, Special Award, Lifetime Achievement Award and Asian Sports Journalist Award. 
The nominations for the remaining categories will be announced gradually, according to NSJF.
Nepal cricket team’s former captain Sandeep Lamichhane, being released on bail on January 13, 2023. Photo: Aryan Dhimal
No other Nepali cricketer has achieved success like Sandeep Lamichhane. That said, no Nepali cricketer has been convicted of being a rapist either.
Kathmandu District Court, on Wednesday, handed Lamichhane an eight-year prison sentence for raping Gaushala 26 by taking advantage of her poor financial condition. 
The crime he committed not only branded him as a criminal but also cast a shadow over all his success and achievements. He was once dubbed the future of Nepali cricket. When he was selected to play in the Indian Premier League, many pinned him to take Nepali cricket to new heights. 
But now, after being convicted of rape, Lamichhane’s future in cricket is uncertain.
A humble beginning 
File: Sandeep Lamichhane
It was in 2015 when former national cricket coach Pubudu Dassanayake saw Sandeep Lamichhane, bowling in the nets at Kyampachaur, Chitwan. His bowling skills immediately caught Dassanayake’s attention as he called the then 14-year-old Lamichhane to join the U19 team.
It did not take time for him to get into the national team as he made his senior team debut against Namibia in the ICC World Cricket League Championship. There was no stopping him thereafter.
In 2018, Sandeep Lamichhane was selected by the Indian Premier League team Delhi Daredevils and played nine matches in two seasons. After becoming the first Nepali cricketer to play in IPL his fame rocketed globally too. Interest started coming in from other T20 leagues too as he took part in Big Bash League, Afghanistan Premier League, Caribbean Premier League and Pakistan Premier League to name a few.
He was at the top of the world. Many say he felt invincible. His attitude changed with the stardom he got. Being appointed the national team captain added fuel to the fire as his career and stardom as at the pinnacle.
Wrong turn 
Sandeep Lamichhane.
That stardom, however, was not to last as it seemed to have caught up to him.
On September 6, 2022, a girl, files a complaint against the then captain of the then Nepal national cricket team, Sandeep Lamichhane, accusing him of raping her in a Kathmandu Hotel on August 22. As the complaint was filed in Kathmandu, Lamichhane was in the Caribbean islands taking part in the Caribbean Premier League in the West Indies.  
The news created uproar all over the sports fraternity, globally. 
The girl, whom police and the court call Gaushala 26, reported to police, that on the eve of the Nepal cricket team’s Kenya departure on August 22, Sandeep Lamichhane asked her to go on a trip to Bhaktapur, and she agreed.
As it got late, Gaushala 26 could not go to her hostel as it shut its doors at 8 pm. She said, in the report, Lamichhane told her to stay with him for the night. That is when she said she was raped by Lamichhane who then flew to Kenya with the national cricket team the next day.
Two days after a  complaint was filed against Lamichhane on September 8 the Kathmandu District Court issued an arrest warrant against him.  On the same day, the Cricket Association of Nepal, a cricket governing body of Nepal, suspended Lamichhane from the team
On the run
File: Sandeep Lamichhane
After an arrest warrant was issued against Lamichhane as he was suspended by CAN, he left his CPL team. He pleaded innocence to charges put against him through his social media account.  However, despite this, Lamichhane did not come to Nepal. He went missing in action. That led to the Department of Immigration blacklisting Lamichhane on September 21 so the police could arrest him as soon as he landed.
Seventeen days had passed since the issuance of an arrest warrant against him, yet he remained inaccessible. However, on September 25, he announced through a social media post that he was taking some time off to stay alone to cope with stress but assured his return to address the case. Thereon, on September 26, Nepal Police issued a diffusion notice to all Interpol members, seeking assistance in arresting him.
Day of arrest 
Police arrest Sandeep Lamichhane at the Kathmandu airport, on Thursday, October 6, 2022. Photo: Bikash Shrestha
On October 6, a month after the issuance of an arrest warrant against him, Lamichhane returned to Nepal and was arrested. 
Despite his earlier statement expressing his intention to surrender, he was arrested as soon as he landed at the Tribhuvan International Airport.
99 days in custody
Rape-accused cricket star Sandeep Lamichhane leaves the Kathmandu District Court, on Friday, November 4, 2022. Photo: Aryan Dhimal
Lamichhane then spent 99 days in custody after the Kathmandu District Court permitted Nepal Police to detain him as they investigated the case. 
On October 31, the government attorney’s office filed a lawsuit, demanding a jail sentence of 10 to 12 years, against Sandeep Lamichhane. And on November 4 Lamichhane was sent to judicial custody until the final verdict. 
Bailed out 
Nepal cricket team’s former captain Sandeep Lamichhane was released on bail on Friday, January 13, 2023. Photo: Chandra Bahadur Ale
Surprisingly, on January 12, 2023, the Patan High Court, however, ordered his release on a bail of Rs 2 million.
A division bench of Dhruva Raj Nanda and Ramesh Dhakal heard Lamichhane’s appeal for release and decided to let him fight the legal battle staying out of jail. Despite releasing Lamichhane, the court restricted him from going abroad until the final verdict.
Back in the business 
Sandeep Lamichhane celebrates after taking a wicket from Scotland, during a match held under the ICC Men’s Cricket World Cup League 2, in Kathmandu, on Tuesday, February 21, 2023. Photo: Bikash Shrestha
His release on bail then prompted CAN to lift its suspension on January 31 allowing him to play cricket for Nepal. Two days after the CAN lifted his suspension, on February 2, Lamichhane was in camp.
The return of Lamichhane to the close camp of the national team received flak from various people. Many protested how an accused rapist could be part of the national team. Many went to the streets demanding he be removed but that did not happen as he was even selected for the team which was playing the last leg of the Cricket World Cup League 2.
Despite that, he played the series against Namibia and Scotland. The Scottish players, in solidarity with the survivor, chose not to shake hands with Lamichhane in both games.
He even went to the UAE to take on Papua New Guinea and the UAE after the court granted him special privileges.
After he received his bail, he took part in 20 ODIs and eight T20Is. Noteworthy among these are matches in prestigious events such as the Asian Games and Asia Cup along with three League 2 series, ODI World Cup Qualifiers, and T20 World Cup Qualifiers.
Found guilty 
However, after 15 months of legal battle, Lamichhane was convicted of rape. The bench, presided over by Judge Shishir Raj Dhakal, has deemed Lamichhane guilty of raping Gaushala 26. The court mandated a separate hearing to determine the duration of imprisonment. 
Even though Lamichhane was accused of raping a minor, the court dismissed the claim that the girl was a minor when the incident happened. 
Sentenced to prison
The District Court, on January 10 sentenced Sandeep Lamichhane to eight years of prison and ordered him to pay compensation of Rs 200,000 to the survivor.  According to the court, Lamichhane raped the survivor taking advantage of her poor financial condition. 
Despite the conviction, Lamichhane will not face immediate arrest. He has the option to appeal the district court’s decision first at the High Court and, ultimately, at the Supreme Court.
The court determined that Lamichhane had violated Section 219 (1, 2, and 3) (e) of the Civil Code 2017, as the act was non-consensual.
Suspended from playing cricket
The verdict from the court then prompted the Cricket Association of Nepal to suspend Lamichhane from all forms of cricket. The statement, issued on January 11, said Lamichhane was suspended from playing cricket indefinitely.
Letter to CAN 
Reportedly, Lamichhane has also written a letter to CAN stating that he will not be part of the cricket team until proven innocent. In that letter, he has also requested CAN to release his pending payments as he says he is in a serious financial crisis.
Kathmandu, January 11
Cricket Sandeep Lamichhane has been suspended by the Cricket Association of Nepal after he was slapped with a eight-year prison sentence on charges of rape.
Lamichhane, who was proven guilty of rape by the District Court, Kathmandu, will not be able to take part in both domestic and international cricket competitions.
CAN released a statement stating Lamichhane was suspended indefinitely.
Kathmandu, January 7
The draw for the ICC T20 World Cup 2024 was made public on Friday.
Nepal have been drawn with South Africa, Sri Lanka, Bangladesh and the Netherlands in a tough group.
This will be Nepal’s first international match against South Africa and Sri Lanka. Nepal played against Bangladesh in the T20 World Cup in Bangladesh in 2014.
Nepal will play their first match against the Netherlands on June 4 in Texas. The team will then move to Florida where they will take on Sri Lanka on June 11.
The team’s last two group games will take place on June 14 and June 16 against South Africa and Bangladesh respectively in Saint Vincent and the Grenadines.
This will be Nepal’s second participation in the T20 World Cup. This is the first time 20 teams are taking part in a T20 World Cup.
Kathmandu, January 4
The Cricket Association of Nepal (CAN) has released its yearly cricketing calendar.
CAN, on Thursday, unveiled the calendar outlining Nepal’s participation in international and national competitions.
As per the released annual calendar, Nepal is scheduled to engage in an ODI series against Canada in the first week of February. CAN has confirmed that the three-match series will take place in Nepal.
Additionally, CAN has proposed to Canada’s cricket association to host Nepal A for a tour of Canada in either February or March.
Following the ODI series with Canada, Nepal is set to kick start the 2023-2027 leg of the ICC Cricket World Cup League 2 by hosting the Netherlands and Namibia.
Nepal will then host the same two teams for a T20I series before leaving for the T20 World Cup in the US and the West Indies. 
The cricketing calendar also states that CAN will organise the second edition of the Nepal Premier League around November.
File photo
Kathmandu, January 4
The All Nepal Football Association (ANFA) decision to give 20 per cent of the money collected from matchday tickets to the players has disappeared from its minute.
The central working committee meeting of ANFA, held on December 18, 2023, decided to stop the distribution of free passes during international games and to provide 20 per cent of the amount raised from ticket sales to the players.
The minutes of the decision from that meeting were forwarded by Kiran Rai, the General Secretary of ANFA, to the senior vice president, vice president, central members, and office bearers on January 1. However, the decision taken on December 18 is absent from it.
According to the statute of ANFA, minutes must be sent in writing to the members of the working committee within 15 days of the meeting. Accordingly, in the 17-point minute sent by Kiran Rai to the members of the working committee on Tuesday, the decision made by the working committee regarding proceeds from the matchday ticket being given to players has been removed.
The central members of ANFA have raised objections to this situation. They contend that the response received indicates that the minutes included discussions not addressed in the working committee meeting, while crucially omitting the matters that were decided upon.
However, ANFA spokesperson Suresh Shah has offered a different explanation, stating that the omission was the result of a typing mistake. According to Shah, the decision was not intentionally removed but was overlooked due to a typing error. Subsequently, the error was rectified, and the corrected minutes were resent.
Kathmandu, December 31
Lalitpur City FC have won the Nepal Super League 2023 by beating Dhangadhi FC.
In the final held at Dasharath Stadium on Saturday, Lalitpur defeated Dhangadhi 3-2 to be crowned the new champions.
In the course of the match, Dhangadi took the lead in the 37th minute thanks to Afeez Olawale. However, during the additional time in the first half, Imoh Ezekiel of Lalitpur equalised.
Dinesh Henjan then scored to give Lalitpur a 2-1 lead in the 50th minute, and this advantage was doubled after Ezekiel scored his second of the game in the 58th minute. 
Despite pushing, Dhangadhi could not find a way back into the game and went on to lose the game 3-2 after a late consolation strike from Ahmed Hijazi. 
Along with the title, Lalitpur also took home a cash prize of Rs 7 million. 
This marks the second occasion that Dhangadhi has secured the runner-up position in the Nepal Super League having lost to Kathmandu in the 2021 edition of the tournament. They won a cash prize of Rs 2 million.
Kushal Deuba celebrates after scoring the winner for Lalitpur City FC in Qualifier 2 of the Nepal Super League 2023.
Kathmandu, December 29
Lalitpur City FC beat Pokhara Thunders to set a date with Dhangadi FC in the final of the Nepal Super League 2023.
In a tightly contested match, Lalitpur, who were down to 10 men, beat Pokhara 2-1 in extra time.
Despite losing Nikhil Khadam to two yellows, Lalitpur took the lead thanks to Imoh Ezekiel on the stroke of half-time. 
Pokhara kept pushing and putting pressure on Lalitpur in the second half and scored an equaliser in the 71st minute thanks to Stephen Kojo Paapa Anno.
Pokhara pushed on but failed to get the winner against the 10-man Lalitpur taking the game to extra time.
The Thunders struggled to make any inroads in the extra time and made a defensive mistake which was capitalised by Kushal Deubla to win the match for Lalitpur and take them to the final.
Bishal Shrestha celebrates as Nepal equalise against India on September 5, 2021.
“I am emotional but happy. You have done a lot and achieved a lot. You are an inspiration for many including me. I am always proud of you. Your fan forever.” 
Bidhya Shrestha, the sister of Bishal Shrestha, posted this on her social media after he announced his retirement from international football on December 22 during the post-match conference after a match between FC Chitwan and Jhapa FC during the Nepal Super League 2023.
Since then, the goalkeeper has been receiving an outpouring of messages and wishes from family, friends, and fans. He had never anticipated that his retirement would generate such a buzz within the football fraternity and media. 
Bishal Shrestha, who had informally retired after not playing a single game during the 2023 SAFF Championship, decided to formally announce it during the post-match conference which took many by surprise.
“Everything has a perfect time and I thought that day was perfect to announce retirement,” says Shrestha.
Playing the waiting game
Bishal Shrestha dives towards the ball during a Nepal Super League match.
Bishal Shrestha has been part of the national football since 2011 but the 31-year-old has hardly played. His only appearance for the national team came in 2021 when he came on as a substitute in the 85th minute against India replacing captain Kiran Kumar Limbu. Despite it being a brief cameo, he fondly reminisces about that match as the highlight of his footballing career.
“Every boy dreams of playing for the national team and I will forever be thankful to Abdullah Almutairi for sending me in despite Nepal losing 2-0 to India. Those 10 minutes will be with me forever,” says Shrestha.
Bishal Shrestha hoped that after that game, more opportunities would come his way, but unfortunately, that has not been the case as he has not played a minute for Nepal since. Recognising the challenges faced by backup goalkeepers, he acknowledges that second-choice goalkeepers often receive fewer chances, and he is no exception to this reality.
“Being a goalkeeper is tough in the world of football. If there is one goalkeeper better than us, that’s game over for us most times,” says Shrestha.
The course of events could have taken a different turn if Bishal Shrestha had not been injured in 2012. Given that most first-choice goalkeepers were injured during the Nehru Cup in India, there was a significant chance that he could have played. However, the injury delayed his journey to the national team by a year or two.
“It is what it is. Luck also plays an important role,” he says.
Consistently being second or third in line was demotivating for him. However, his love for the game and his patience acted as enduring sources of motivation, enabling him to stay with the national team and remain hopeful. Furthermore, he received significant support from his family members.
“I am happy with whatever I have been able to do for the national team,” says Shrestha.     
Bishal Shrestha, who nurtured dreams of representing the national team since childhood, looks back at his time with the national squad as a moment filled with pride and happiness. Reflecting on his experiences, he shares a deep connection with the national team.
“I will miss every aspect—the camaraderie in the dressing room, the journeys with teammates, and the intensity of matches,” says Shrestha.
A-Division Legend
Bishal Shrestha Photo: Chandra Bahadur Ale 
Despite not having the opportunity to play many games for the national team, Bishal Shrestha has been impressive in the A Division League.
In the Martyr’s Memorial A Division League in 2022, he achieved an impressive record of keeping 11 clean sheets, going over a thousand minutes without conceding a goal. In recognition of his outstanding performance, he was named the best goalkeeper of the league that year as he conceded only two goals in 13 matches. 
He played a crucial role in Machhindra Football Club winning a title without losing a single game. In the 2020 season, he also had an outstanding performance, losing only one game as Machhindra secured another league title.
In total, Bishal Shrestha has clinched four league titles, securing two with Manang Marshyangdi Club and two with Machhindra Football Club since his debut in the A Division League in 2009.
Similarly, Shrestha has also participated in both editions of the Nepal Super League. In the first edition, he played for Butwal-Lumbini Football Club, and in the second edition, he was captain and the marquee player for Football Club Chitwan.
During the conversation with Onlinekhabar, Shrestha also highlighted the significance of goalkeepers in football. He pointed out that people often do not credit goalkeepers for victories, but they play a crucial role, handling 50 per cent of the game.
“Goalie is a captain without an armband,” he says. “It is a fun and difficult position in football.” 
Even though Shrestha is no longer part of the national team, he remains equally concerned about the state of Nepali football as he was before.
He is worried as footballers continue to leave the country and has said he will stay in Nepal and try to contribute to football in whatever way possible.
“I hope football gets more priority so that this exodus stops and I too can continue playing the sport I love,” says Shrestha.
To improve the sport, Shrestha urges the All Nepal Football Association (ANFA) to establish a proper calendar for the leagues and strive to host games regularly.
“Players will only feel secure staying in the country if there are more games scheduled, providing them with consistent opportunities,” he says.
Kathmandu, December 27
Lalitpur City FC recorded a comprehensive victory over Kathmandu Rayzrs to book a play in Qualifier 2 of the Nepal Super League 2023.
In what was a one-sided eliminator of the playoffs, Lalitpur beat Kathmandu 3-0 thanks to a brace from Imo Ezekiel and one from Papa Ibou Kebe.
Lalitpur will now face Pokhara Thunders in Qualifier 2 on Thursday with the winners going on to face Dhangadhi FC in the final of the Nepal Super League on Saturday.
Ahmed Hijazi celebrates after scoring a last-minute equalizer against Pokhara Thunders.
Kathmandu, December 26
Dhangadhi FC have booked a place in the final of the Nepal Super League 2023 by beating Pokhara Thunders on penalties on Monday.
In a tightly contested match between the two in Qualifier 1 of the Nepal Super League 2023, Dhangadhi narrowly edged out Pokhara 4-3 on penalties.
The game started with Pokhara Thunders taking an early lead thanks to Ayush Ghalan. Despite dominating the game, the Thunders could not score another goal as Dhangadhi’s keeper, Mohamad Taha made some good saves to keep Dhangadhi in the game who looked off pace in the first half.
The second half, however, was a different story as Dhangadhi started well scoring in the 54th minute to equalise. Despite many chances for both teams, the game ended up going to extra time.



The extra time was a cagy affair with both teams looking gassed after a frantic 90 minutes. Stephan Kojo, however, took advantage of some poor defending to give Pokhara the lead in the 103rd minute.
Things looked bleak for Dhangadhi but a last-minute goal from Ahmed Hijazi sent the game to penalties which they won 4-3.
Pokhara Thunders have another chance to reach the final if they beat the winners of the eliminator between Kathmandu Rayzrs and Lalitpur City FC.
Kathmandu, December 25
The Pickleball Association of Nepal will host the Nepal Open International Pickleball Tournament in March 2024.
According to a press statement released by the Pickleball Association of Nepal, there will be 120 players competing in the tournament. Divisions will be arranged according to skill level, with categories for beginner, intermediate and advanced players. Players will be categorised under four ages—19+ years, 35+ years, 50+ years and over 60.
It adds that in the competition, there will be international players from the USA, Spain, the UK, India and Thailand who will compete in men’s and women’s singles, doubles and mixed doubles for 216 medals.
The tournament is scheduled on March 8 and 9, which will take place at the National Tennis Complex in Satdobato. Those who are interested can visit the official website of the association (www.pickleballnepal.com.np) and can apply for the tournament.
The league stage of the Nepal Super League 2023 proved to be a captivating spectacle, marked by a blend of drama, excitement, intense competition among players, and a series of unexpected results.
Nepal’s only franchise football league, which started a month ago, witnessed 36 thrilling league matches between nine teams. 
Following a series of gruelling and dramatic matches, Pokhara Thunders, Dhangadhi FC, Kathmandu Rayzrs, and Lalitpur City FC will compete against each other in the playoffs to be crowned Nepal Super League champions.
While Dhangadi, Kathmandu and Lalitpur have all been here before during the first edition of the Nepal Super League, table toppers Pokhara will be taking part in their first as they bid to win the championship with their young team.
Standing in their way, however, will be Dhangadi who finished runners-up in the first edition of Nepal Super League held in 2021. Kathmandu, who are the defending champions, will also prove to be a tough test along with Lalitpur who would want to better their third-place finish in the first edition.
Pokhara, who narrowly missed the playoffs in 2021 due to goal difference, have clinched the top spot in the standings for the current season. They secured 15 points from eight games, boasting a record of four wins, three draws, and one loss. Dhangadhi claimed the second position with 13 points earned with three wins, four draws, and one loss. Kathmandu finished third accumulating 12 points with three wins, three draws, and two losses. Despite losing two in a row, Lalitpur finished the fourth with 10 points with two wins, four draws and two losses.
Lalitpur, however, can consider themselves fortunate as they finished with the same number of points as Jhapa FC and Butwal Lumbini. However, Lalitpur managed to secure a spot in the playoffs by a superior goal difference.
4 teams 1 cup

The playoffs will consist of four games, including the final. The first qualifier, scheduled for Monday, will feature a face-off between the top two teams, Pokhara and Dhangadhi. The winner of this match will secure a direct spot in the final while the losing team will still have another opportunity to reach the final in the next qualifier.
In their recent league stage encounter, Pokhara and Dhangadhi battled to a draw, with Pokhara scoring a last-minute goal to equalize after Dhangadhi initially took the lead.
Tuesday will see Kathmandu take on Lalitpur in the eliminator. If the last game between them is anything to go by, this valley derby where the loser will go home will likely see a record crowd for an NSL match.
The winner of this match will then face the loser of Pokhara and Dhangadi on Thursday to book a ticket to the final of the Nepal Super League 2023 on Saturday. All matches during the playoff will start at 5.30 pm. 
The winner of the Nepal Super League 2023 will receive a cash prize of Rs 7.5 million.
Kathmandu, December 22
The Nepal Super League 2023 is gaining momentum with each passing game. Recent match outcomes have intensified the excitement, particularly as teams vie for the top four playoff spots.
In the ongoing nine-team tournament, 32 out of 36 league stage matches have been played, leaving only two playoff berths up for grabs. With only four league games left, the four teams advancing to the playoffs in the Nepal Super League will be determined on Saturday evening.
So far, Pokhara Thunders and Dhangadhi FC have already secured their spots in the playoffs, while four teams, Jhapa FC, Lalitpur FC, Kathmandu Razyrs and Birgunj United, are competing for the remaining two positions.
Sporting Ilam FC, Butwal Lumbini FC, and FC Chitwan have been officially eliminated from the playoff contention.
Dramatic week

This week’s Nepal Super League games produced surprising results, with title-contending teams facing unexpected losses. The excitement kicked off with a 1-1 draw between defending champions Kathmandu Rayzrs and former runners-up Dhangadhi FC on Monday. 
On Tuesday, Sporting Ilam, who were out of the playoff contention, beat Lalitpur City FC 1-0 ending their unbeaten run in Nepal Super League 2023. A win against Ilam would have taken Lalitpur to the playoffs but now have a tough match against Kathmandu in the city derby.
On Wednesday, Jhapa injected more drama into the league by securing a 2-0 victory over Dhangadhi FC. Jhapa, who were reduced to 10 men, blew the table wide open with this win thanks to a talismanic performance from captain Anjan Bista.
On Thursday more fuel was added to the fire after Birgunj United came from behind to beat defending champions Kathmandu Rayzrs 4-1. Kathmandu were all but set to get to the playoffs, but Ghanaian William Opoku had other ideas as he scored an impressive hat trick, including two in two minutes, to take the game away from the defending champions. This win has given Birgunj a great chance to qualify for the playoffs.
The recent defeat could prove costly for Kathmandu, forcing them to win their last league match against Lalitpur to stay in the race for defending the title. It sets the stage for a do-or-die situation for Kathmandu.
Kathmandu’s head coach, Bal Gopal Maharjan, acknowledged the team’s subpar performance, saying, “This is the biggest loss in my coaching career. I have never experienced anything like this.”
The Nepal Super League has become increasingly thrilling as title contenders have suffered consecutive losses, adding an extra layer of excitement to the league.
The tables have turned

As of now, only Pokhara Thunders have secured a place in the playoffs and are poised to finish in the top two, especially considering recent setbacks for Kathmandu and Lalitpur. Finishing first or second will be crucial for Pokhara, providing them with two chances to reach the final scheduled for December 30.
Pokhara Thunders are on the top of the table with 14 points from seven games. Their final league match is against Dhangadhi FC on Friday. Former runners-up, Dhangadhi FC, are currently in second position with 12 points.
Their match will determine who finishes top. A draw would be sufficient for Pokhara to maintain the top spot. Alternatively, Dhangadhi can secure the top position by defeating Pokhara, setting the stage for the first qualifier between the two teams.
Lalitpur City FC and Jhapa FC currently hold the third and fourth positions in the league standings with 10 points each. Former champions Kathmandu Ragers are in fifth place with nine points from seven games. Birgunj, after beating Kathmandu, holds the sixth position with eight points, keeping their chances of securing a top-four spot alive.
On Friday, Jhapa FC will face FC Chitwan in a crucial match where a victory would almost certainly secure their place in the eliminator. Simultaneously, Birgunj United, in their match against Butwal Lumbini, will be seeking a win to propel them into the playoffs. The final match featuring Kathmandu against Lalitpur is anticipated to be intense, as it is a must-win game for Kathmandu if they harbour any aspirations of clinching a playoff berth.
Entrepreneurship education is not just an investment in the education system; it is an investment in the nation’s future prosperity. Photo: Pexels/ Rodnae Productions
In the shadow of the towering Himalayas, Nepal faces a challenge that rivals the steepness of its mountainous terrain- the challenge of economic development. As the nation earnestly pursues its Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs), it becomes increasingly evident that a transformation in the education system is not only necessary but also urgent. 
Rooted in common living strategies, the prevailing education model, especially in higher education, may not adequately prepare the youth for the demands of the modern world. 
In this critical juncture, the incorporation of entrepreneurship education emerges as a beacon of hope, offering a pathway towards a self-reliant and prosperous Nepal.
Time to reevaluate the education system
Nepal’s journey towards economic prosperity has been marked by challenges that demand innovative solutions. The commitment of the SDGs reflects not only a global responsibility but also a domestic imperative for sustainable development. For this, it is high time to reevaluate the education system in the country.
The current education system in Nepal, deeply entrenched in common living strategies, has been the foundation of learning for generations. However, in the face of a rapidly evolving world, today’s generation aspires for more than the status quo. The call for independence reverberates through the aspirations of youth who seek a curriculum fostering critical thinking, innovation and entrepreneurial skills.
Entrepreneurship education is a dynamic force capable of reshaping Nepal’s educational landscape. This innovative approach moves beyond traditional learning methods, providing students with the tools to navigate the complexities of the modern world. At its core, entrepreneurship education is about empowering students to implement learned information in practical and tangible ways.
Consider a student engrossed in the intricacies of sensor systems during a science class, entrepreneurship education transforms this theoretical knowledge into practical applications, inspiring the creation of a sensor-operated door. Such innovation born from a fusion of science and entrepreneurship becomes a valuable mindset in solving practical problems.  
Expanding the horizons of entrepreneurship education, let us delve into chemistry. Imagine students studying chemistry not just as a theoretical subject, but also as entrepreneurs in the making. Armed with entrepreneurial principles, these students can tap into Nepal’s rich biodiversity, exploring market demands for products derived from local plants.
In the scenario, chemistry students could embark on a journey to develop performance-enhancing products based on market demand, harnessing the potential of indigenous flora. What makes this approach remarkable is that it does not necessarily require sophisticated machines or extensive human resources. Instead, it leverages the inherent skills and awareness of individuals within the community, paving the way for a grassroots economic revolution.
Entrepreneurship in education 
Representational graphic. Image: Freepik
The beauty of entrepreneurship education lies in its universal applicability. It is not confined to science or chemistry alone. Consider an art student, for example. Through entrepreneurship education, they can understand what art to develop (product), how much to set the price (price), where to sell (place) and how to sell (promote) their artworks. Every subject becomes a canvas for innovation and enterprise.
Moreover, entrepreneurship education is a powerful equaliser, recognising the unique skills and talents of individuals across various disciplines. It is not about fitting into a predefined mould but rather about unleashing the potential within each student. When every single person is aware of their skills and potential, they can rise to different levels, contributing to the overall progress of the nation.
Entrepreneurship education goes beyond skill recognition; it is about nurturing the ability to produce goods and mastering the art of marketing. Returning to the example of the student developing a sensor-operated door, entrepreneurship education not only equips them to produce the product but also teaches them how to navigate the complexities of marketing it to potential users and clients.
The impact of entrepreneurship education extends beyond individual success stories; it reverberates through the entire nation. A generation equipped with entrepreneurial skills becomes a driving force for economic growth and independence. They will be able to recognise the resources and ideas to utilise them to reach the global market. They will be able to be the pioneers in products and contribute to the economy. By fostering a culture of innovation, creativity and self-reliance, Nepal can reduce its dependence on external sources and strengthen its economy from within.
In essence, entrepreneurship education is not just an investment in the education system; it is an investment in the nation’s future prosperity. It is a transformative force that has the potential to shape a generation of independent thinkers, innovators and entrepreneurs- the architects of a self-reliant and economically vibrant Nepal. Entrepreneurship education, by teaching students to utilise available resources (physical and financial) and make them commercial, becomes a cornerstone in the nation’s journey towards economic empowerment and independence.
File 
Kathmandu, January 26
Santoshi Shrestha has won a gold medal with a national record in the Bangabandhu Sheikh Mujib Dhaka Marathon held in Dhaka, Bangladesh. She completed the prescribed distance in 2 hours 46 minutes 22 seconds and won gold.
She has previously broken the record of 2 hours 48 minutes 02 seconds held by Nepal’s Pushpa Bhandari and set a new record. This competition is the debut marathon of Shrestha, who has been running in middle distance before.
Shrestha is the gold winner of the 13th South Asian Games (SAG) in athletics 10,000 meters race held in Kathmandu four years ago.
Bhandari came second in the Bangabandhu Sheikh Mujib Dhaka Marathon. She completed it in 2 hours 49 minutes 34 seconds. She is the gold winner of the last edition of the Dhaka Marathon.
Similarly, Khadag Bahadur Khadka came third in the men’s competition. He took 2 hours 18 minutes 32 seconds to complete.
On the women’s side, Bindradhanke Shrestha finished fifth. She took 3 hours and 4 minutes.
Out of seven players from Nepal, three men and four women participated, two women and one man won medals.
Matoghar at Godawari. Photo: Abhiyan Dahal
In the heart of the Kathmandu Valley, Basanta Shrestha grew up seeing the Newa settlement as defined by quintessential architectural norms. But after the 2000s, concrete took over the traditional house-making approach in the city. 
When the earthquake struck in 2015, Shrestha was working as the Director of Strategic Cooperation at the International Centre for Integrated Mountain Development (ICIMOD). 
There he started working on the reconstruction project at Nuwakot. Determined to help the community rise from the rubble, he was busy building some 100 houses which were being crafted using compressed blocks, a sustainable alternative to traditional building materials and also a commitment to environmental preservation. 
With the earthquake and the newfound appreciation for traditional houses, people started rediscovering ancient knowledge.
“That is when I understood the concept of eco-friendly and sustainable building. From then I was building on the idea to construct a house that meets all those criteria with functionality as a priority.”
Building Matoghar
As it is said, one man’s trash is another man’s treasure, after the earthquake, not only did the idea of Matoghar start but the family got a lot of the materials to use for the house as well. 
“In the post-earthquake reconstruction, a lot of people were ditching the rubbles and building their new houses. But we salvaged them and put them to good use including recycled tiles, recycled wooden floors and recovered steel bars.”
Ingrained with the new idea and realisation of sustainability, Shrestha reused them in the house. Amid the challenging times brought about by the Covid pandemic, Shrestha and his wife undertook a unique journey to build their dream house. 
“Building our house during the pandemic was a transformative experience. Our decision to use rammed earth and repurpose materials was a conscious effort to harmonise with nature and reduce our impact on the environment.”
Adding to the cosy environment and warm living, they have added the double-glazed windows. 
“All this together with the rammed earth walls and floors works as a good insulator, a natural thermostat. It is warm in the winter and cooler in the summer. And that we as well as others been noticed by others too, while living here.”
Retiring in peace
Interiors of the Matoghar at Godawari. Photo: Abhiyan Dahal
As the sun sets, casting a warm glow upon the exterior, the couple who retired last year is now enjoying their time amid nature, in peace. 
The commitment to an eco-friendly lifestyle is palpable in every nook and cranny of the house. But he is also a big champion of local knowledge and craftsmanship. So one can see many bits and pieces of different communities, proudly stamped ‘made in Nepal’. 
“From Thasi village, we brought the sukuls (weaved straw mats), and handcrafted bamboo blinders. We have artworks from the local artists of Harisiddhi, there are local brass handles and decorations from we have old utensils of copper and wooden artefacts.”
Matoghar is made of a monolithic structure with load-bearing walls and refurbished beams. 
“The walls, a robust 18 inches thick, and fortified with tie beams. It all follows the building code for the earthquake in 2015,” says Minu Pradhan Shrestha. 
By incorporating refurbished and reused materials throughout the interior, they not only reduced their ecological footprint but also created a space that exuded warmth and character. 
“To maximise the power, we integrated solar batteries and reused materials to build their utility rooms and helper quarters,” says Minu Pradhan.
Interiors of the Matoghar at Godawari. Photo: Nasana Bajracharya
Matoghar has become a testament to the idea that adversity can be an opportunity for positive change and that a connection to both the past and the environment can be seamlessly woven into the fabric of modern living. Also, being particular about his choices, he has blended more specific outlets and fixtures around the house. 
“I have waited up to six months to get some particular items around the house. I am very particular,” says Shrestha.
With ample space to their advantage and taking up his hobby further, they have set up eight flourishing vegetable plots. The plots have the water and are nurtured by the organic vermicompost, blending organic fertiliser enriched with charcoal and animal waste. 
“Last year, except for a few vegetables that we have not sown here, like potatoes, it was enough for the family to eat without any purchase,” says Minu Pradhan.
Not only did they use the waste carefully, but they were also mindful of the waste they created around the house. 
“As we inch towards near zero waste, we have set different systems around the house. One is for the rainwater collection, from the roofs and the grounds, in colossal tanks boasting a capacity of 20,000 to 25,000 litres. Another is wastewater treatment, with three different segments that further filter the solids and liquids–which are used for the vegetable plots and the biogas.”
Vegetable garden maintained by the family. Photo: Abhiyan Dahal
Shrestha says the only kind of waste they are creating or throwing out of the premises, is plastic waste, which is unavoidable.
Inspiring others
And one thing that worked in their favour was the very ground they were planning to build their retirement house. 
“So what we found out was that the soil in the land was full of red mud, and it was a perfect requirement for us to build the house and it minimised our cost by a lot,” says Shrestha.
But the construction was not easy. They needed to have a lot of patience as it took both time, effort and energy to complete it.
“It took us one to two years in the design phase and an additional three to four years to finalise the construction,” says Minu Pradhan.
The family has architect Narayan Acharya to thank for playing a key role in shaping their dream into reality. The couple say Acharya blended aesthetics and sustainability, crafting a living space that not only reflected the family’s values but also made positive contributions to the local economy.
View of the landscape from Matoghar. Photo: Nasana Bajracharya
Matoghar is situated on the outskirts of Lalitpur, nestled amid the serene hills and lush greenery. For over a year now, they two have been inhabitants of the house, close to nature, surrounded by the hills. 
“Given the scale, the cost is a bit more than what people would anticipate. It costs us roughly about Rs 6,000 per sq ft. So it is realised that it may not be possible to build it in cities. Cost-wise too, it would not be everyone’s cup of tea. But it is comparatively more sustainable in the long run and on a bigger scale.”
Since it is nestled in the cascading hills, close to the sound of the rustling leaves and chirping of birds, house owners say they have been suggested to consider the concept of Airbnb-style packaging with curated packages for others. 
“We have thought about it but our focus is not merely on living. We want to enjoy our retirement, in harmony with nature,” he says.
Patio made with recycled brick tiles and rammed earth at the premise of Matoghar. Photo: Abhiyan Dahal
The inspiration for this lifestyle shift reaches beyond the tranquil hillsides. They are open to anyone who wants to study the house–layout, system and design, learn from their experience, and replicate their approach. 
“Renowned figures like actor Hari Bansha Acharya have visited us and shown interest to replicate and follow suit–we are more than happy to see it replicated,” he says
The mainstream construction has not started for the Matoghar. But as good news, he shares that 20 more in construction, spearheaded by Acharya and his team.
Kathmandu, January 26
On Thursday, 19 new members were elected to the National Assembly. Among them, 18 belong to the ruling coalition, while one is affiliated with the UML. 
These individuals secured their positions through votes cast by members of the provincial assembly, as well as local-level chiefs and deputy chiefs.
Four members were elected in Bagmati Province, while three members each were elected in Gandaki, Karnali, and Sudurpaschim. Similarly, two members each were elected in Koshi, Madhesh, and Lumbini. 
The term for the 19 individuals elected on Thursday, along with one person yet to be nominated by the President, will commence on March 4.
New elected National Assembly members:
Koshi: Krishna Prasad Sitaula (Nepali Congress), Rukmini Koirala (UML)Madhesh: Ananda Prasad Dhungana (Nepali Congress), Pooja Chaudhary (JSP)Bagmati: Jit Jung Basnet and Bishnu Devi Pudasaini (Nepali Congress), Shri Krishna Adhikari (Maoist), Ghanshyam Rijal (Unified Socialist).Gandaki: Kiran Babu Shrestha and Padma Bahadur Pariyar (Nepali Congress), Manrupa Sharma (Maoist).Lumbini: Vishnukumari Sapkota (Congress), Jhakku Prasad Subedi (Maoist).Karnali: Savitri Malla (Unified Socialist), Bishnu BK(Maoist), Krishna Bahadur Rokaya (Nepali Congress)Sudurpaschim: Narayan Bhatt and Baldev Bohra (Nepali Congress), Renu Chand (Maoist).
Kathmandu, January 25
On the final day of the weekly trading session, Thursday, NEPSE continued its downward trend.
The market, witnessing a continuous fall since January 17, extended its downward trend for the seventh consecutive day. On Thursday, the NEPSE index saw a decrease of 3.94 points, settling at 2084 points.
The transaction amount on Thursday remained consistent with the previous day, standing at Rs 3.76 billion.
Among the listed companies, the prices of 91 went up, 141 went down and 15 remained stable. 
A varied impact was observed across group indicators, with the Hotels and Tourism group witnessing the most significant decrease at 1 per cent.
The banking and finance sectors rose by 2 points each, development banks increased by 6 points, while the business group recorded a significant increase of 14 points. 
Conversely, hotels and tourism experienced a 58-point increase while hydropower remained stable at 0.4 points and life insurance went up by 45 points.
Manufacturing increased by 5 points, microfinance saw a growth of 18 points, and non-life insurance rose by 47 points. On the other hand, other groups collectively decreased by 9 points.
Samling Power witnessed a 10 per cent increase in its stock price, while Mid Solu Hydro, Infinity Microfinance, Nepal Hydro Developer, and Manakamana Smart Microfinance saw increments of 8.7 per cent, 8.1 per cent, 7 per cent, and 5.9 per cent, respectively. 
On the other hand, Dhaulagiri Microfinance experienced a 4.3 per cent decline in value, followed by Mahuli Microfinance with a 4.1 per cent decrease, Tehrathum Power with a 4 per cent dip, Srijanshil Microfinance with a 3.8 per cent reduction, and Hathway Investment with a 3.4 per cent drop.
In terms of turnover, Himalayan Reinsurance, Ngadi Group, Arun Kabeli, Api Power, and NRN Infrastructure Company ranked ahead, respectively.
Ram Bujhaun Yadav with his land ownership certificate stands near a border pillar which he says was erroneously placed on his land. 
In October 2023, when 51-year-old Ram Bujhaun Yadav of Musaharnia Rural Municipality-5, Mukhiyapatti, Dhanusha, was at a relative’s house, someone told him that two Indian Sashastra Seema Bal (SSB) personnel were looking for him.
Anxious, he rushed home wondering why they were looking for him.
“They asked me if the paddy field in the no man’s land was mine. I told them yes and they asked me to cut down the paddy immediately,” he said.
The paddy was not ripe and Yadav asked them for some time. However, the SSB personnel told him he had to cut down his paddy immediately.
Ram Bujhaun and his wife Tetari Devi each own a 677-square-metre plot of land. As Nepal and India reevaluated the border, Ram Bujhan’s land was been deemed to be near the no man’s land as it now has two demarcation pillars.
Frustrated, Ram Bujhaun cut the paddy before it was due to be harvested. Now, he has been asked to not plant anything on the land as it falls in the no man’s land.
“Our border police don’t say a word. I can’t fight the SSB on my own,” says Ram Bujhaun adding he had decided not to plan anything on the land anymore.
Woes of the farmers
Many farmers in southern Nepal say their land has now been placed in India after the recent demarcation. 
When the Jamuna River, which flows through the no man’s land between Nepal and India, changed its course some two decades ago, some border pillars went missing. Locals say these pillars have now been placed encroaching on Nepali land.
In 2018, with the then Chief District Officer of Dhanusha, Pradeep Raj Kandel, and an official from Madhubani district, Bihar, India, a team that included border security forces from both countries, the Armed Police Force of Nepal, and SSB of India began placing border pillars after land measurement by technicians.
Locals have raised concerns, stating that border pillars have been positioned, encroaching approximately 50 to 100 meters of land into Nepal compared to the previous position. Many like Ram Bujhaun are unaware of when these border pillars were placed.
“I did not know that pillar was placed here. After I found out when I asked the village leaders, many said they were placing the border pillars as they pleased,” said Ram Bujhaun.
He was told to carry on planting paddy and that it would not matter as these issues had happened in the past. 
“They encroached on my land and have asked me not to plant anything. This is gross injustice,” he says.
Ram Bujhaun’s family owns a total of 4,000 square metres of land, with 2,000 square metres belonging to him and the remaining 2,000 square metres to his brother Bechan. However, 1,000 square metres of his land is now located on the Indian side after the demarcation. Despite this, he has been farming on the land and continues to pay taxes to the Department of Land Management and Archive in Nepal.
“They have marked my land to be on the Indian side and placed border pillars on it. I’ve been farming till now but I don’t know when they will ask me to stop,” he says.
Ignorance of the government
The Madhesh province in southern Nepal
The former ward chair of Mukhiyapatti Musharniya Rural Municipality-5, Ram Naresh Yadav, said that over time, India has encroached on numerous Nepali lands in various locations in the Madhesh Province. This, he says, happened due to the Nepali administration’s ignorance and weak stature.
“They (Nepali administration) were careless and that meant the Indian side placed these border pillars by encroaching on Nepali land,” says Ram Naresh.
He said that over 40 farmers from wards 1, 5, and 6 have land ranging from 300 to 1,600 square metres on the Indian side. 
“These farmers have land ownership certificates, but they cannot farm as the SSB says the land is in India and not Nepal,” said Ram Naresh.
In 1996, land ownership certificates were distributed after surveying the land in the border area. Local Dharmendra Kumar Yadav said that since then, the locals have been paying their land tax regularly. In 2018, when the pillar was being placed, the locals protested when they saw their land was being encroached on. However, since the demarcation had been agreed upon by high-ranking government officials of Nepal and India, the farmer’s voices went unheard.
“We tried to stop when the border pillars were being placed on our land. But the administrators from both sides forcibly put it there without even trying to hold a discussion,” said Harish Chandra Yadav. 
The Chief District Officer of Dhanusha, Chakrapani Pandey, says that the border pillars were placed by the technical team after the measurements and with the agreement of the high-ranking officials of the two countries.
“The fields and houses that are built in no man’s land have recently been cleared. No one can do anything in this particular area,” said Pandey. “We understand the people’s concern but we cannot do anything about it now.”
Regenerative braking representational image. Photo: Freepik
The electric vehicle market in Nepal has grown significantly over the past year. 
Electric four-wheelers and two-wheelers are being launched almost every month, spanning from passenger to commercial vehicles. Electric transportation appears to be an emerging trend in the automotive industry.
New EVs are regularly introduced with advanced features as car companies develop unique electric platforms. One standout feature is regenerative braking.
Regenerative braking was first introduced in 1967 by the American Motor Car Company (AMC) in their prototype electric vehicle, the AMC Amitron. However, Toyota became the automobile manufacturer to implement regenerative braking system (RBS) technology in their Prius series hybrid vehicles in 1997. Toyota brought up the new hybrid technology in the Prius when fuel prices were going up at a massive rate. 
1997 Toyota Prius Hybrid. Photo: Toyota
But what is regenerative braking? There are still many people confused about what it is, whether it is safe or helpful in fuel economy in hybrid cars and the regeneration of electricity in electric cars.
In simple terms, regen braking is when a car saves energy by recharging its battery when you brake, helping it use less fuel or electricity and go further. Easy but scientifically, regen braking is a process used in vehicles where the kinetic energy produced during braking is converted into electrical energy through an electric motor acting as a generator. This electrical energy is then stored in the vehicle’s battery for later use, reducing energy wastage and increasing overall efficiency.
Photo: Freepik
Regen braking can be seen in all kinds of EVs, including cars, scooters, commercial vans, buses, bicycles, three-wheelers, and rickshaws. It now can be electrically managed to what extent the power and braking can be generated. 
Regenerative Braking work process in EV

Principle of Operation: Regene braking works by turning the energy from slowing down into electricity.
Electric Motor as a Generator: In EV or hybrid cars with regen braking, the motor changes roles from moving the car to making electricity when you brake.
Switching Polarity: When you brake, the motor switches directions, turning energy from the wheels into electricity instead of using it to move the car.
Generation of Electricity: The turning wheels make the motor produce electricity, which goes to the car’s battery.
Power Electronics: Special electronics change the electricity from the motor into the right kind for charging the battery.
Battery Charging: The electricity made during braking charges up the car’s battery, storing the energy for later.
Integration with Hydraulic Braking System: Regenerative braking works with the regular brakes, blending them for smooth stopping.

Photo: automotive-iq
Advantages and Disadvantages of Regenerative Braking 
The advantages are listed below:

Energy Efficiency: Regenerative braking efficiently captures the kinetic energy generated during braking, effectively reducing energy wastage and contributing to a more sustainable driving experience.
Extended Range: By using the energy that would otherwise be lost during braking as heat and sound, regenerative braking helps to extend the driving range of electric vehicles in instances such as travelling downhill. 
Reduced Brake Wear: Regenerative braking minimizes the strain on traditional braking components, mitigating wear and tear, and potentially extending the lifespan of the braking components such as brake pads, rotors and brake lines, thus reducing maintenance costs over time.
Enhanced Driving Experience: Regenerative braking provides a smoother braking experience and a more responsive feel to drivers, enhancing overall driving comfort and control on the road.

The disadvantages are listed below:

Limited Effectiveness at Low Speeds: While regenerative braking efficiently recaptures energy during braking, its effectiveness diminishes at lower speeds which leads to decreased energy recovery compared to higher speeds.
Complexity and Cost: Implementing regenerative braking adds complexity and cost to vehicle systems, potentially raising manufacturing and maintenance expenses, and impacting consumer affordability.
Maintenance Requirements: Regenerative braking systems require periodic maintenance and calibration to ensure they operate optimally.
Efficiency Variability: Regenerative braking may exhibit variability in efficiency under extreme weather conditions or on certain road surfaces, leading to fluctuations in overall energy recapture and impacting the vehicle’s efficiency.

Misconceptions

Fully Recharges Battery: Some mistakenly believe that regenerative braking fully replenishes the battery, but in reality, it only adds a modest amount of charge.
Increases Braking Distances: There is a misconception that regenerative braking extends braking distances, but it enhances braking performance by complementing traditional brakes.
High-Speed Only: While more effective at higher speeds, regenerative braking still functions at lower speeds, such as during city driving or stop-and-go traffic.
Maintenance-Free: Despite requiring less maintenance than traditional brakes, regen braking systems still need periodic checks and maintenance to ensure proper operation.
Significantly Boosts Range: While regen braking contributes to extending the driving range of electric vehicles, its impact is influenced by various factors beyond just braking efficiency.
Only for Electric Cars: Although commonly associated with electric vehicles, regen braking systems are also found in some conventional vehicles, particularly those aiming to improve fuel efficiency with advanced technology.

Photo: Freepik
Regenerative braking might sound complicated, but it is pretty cool. Think of it as a way for EVs and hybrids to recycle energy when they slow down. Instead of just wasting that energy, regenerative braking turns it into electricity, which can then be used to power the battery.
The snow leopard rescued from Urlabari is currently being kept at the Central Zoo in Lalitpur. Photo: Aryan Dhimal
As the gates to the vet clinic at the Central Zoo in Lalitpur opened, more than two dozen photojournalists thronged the facility and surrounded a metal cage aiming their DSLR cameras at a snow leopard inside.
“Please don’t come close to the animal,” the zoo’s vet, Radha Krishna Gharti, told approaching photojournalists. But in the gush of excitement to take exclusive photographs of the elusive cat, difficult to spot even in its prime habitats, there were few takers for the word of caution.
Nepal’s Department of National Parks and Wildlife Conservation (DNPWC) organised the photo-op two days after the male subadult cat, which was until recently found in the country only at altitudes higher than 2,000-6,000 metres above sea level, was brought to the zoo from Urlabari town(146 m above sea level). According to the department, the animal has sustained injuries to its right foreleg and cannot stand upright.
Although officials involved said they are looking at releasing the animal into the wild after it recuperates, doing so will be a daunting task, adding that the zoo may be the only place where it can now survive.
Not a wild cat
Reporters and photojournalists take photos of a snow leopard being held at the Central Zoo in Lalitpur, Nepal. Image by Abhaya Raj Joshi/ Mongabay

“Nepali snow leopard experts have come up with two hypotheses to explain how the animal from the mountains landed up in the plains,” said Sharad Chandra Adhikari, member-secretary at the National Trust for Nature Conservation (NTNC), a semi-government body that manages the zoo in Lalitpur, a town in the Kathmandu Valley. 
The first of the two hypotheses made public during the photo-op-cum-press conference, is that it was raised in captivity and somehow managed to escape into the wild. The second is that it lost its orientation while trying to establish its territory after separating from its mother.
Kulbhushansingh Suryawanshi, director of the India program, Snow Leopard Trust, said that both hypotheses are plausible explanations as to how the snow leopard got to the plains in Nepal.
A DNPWC official, who wished to remain anonymous as he is not authorised to talk to the press, said that it was more likely that the animal had been raised in captivity. 
“The way it sipped the water and ate the food zoo staff offered indicates that it may have been raised in captivity,” the official said.
Snow leopards are shy cats living at extreme altitudes in the steep mountainous areas of 12 countries in Central and South Asia. Their global population spread over altitudes of 500-5,800 m, is estimated to be between around 3,900 and 6,000 as detailed coordinated surveys of the population in the range countries are yet to be carried out. In Nepal, their population divided into three blocks (eastern, central and western) is estimated to be between 301 and 400.
Adhikari from NTNC said that researchers will now examine the animal’s scat to analyse its diet and try to find out whether it was roaming in the wild or had been in some sort of captivity. Researchers are also preparing to analyse its genes to try to find out to which of the three metapopulations in Nepal it belongs. They will also observe the animal’s canine teeth and fur to look for clues.
Relocation challenge 
A snow leopard found in Urlabari town in Nepal’s plains in a cage at the Central Zoo in Kathmandu. Photo: Aryan Dhimal
The whole process could take a few months to complete, and summer could set in in Kathmandu by then, officials concede. 
“The current temperature in Kathmandu is suitable for snow leopards, as we are in the peak of winter,” said Madhu Chetri, a snow leopard researcher from NTNC. But that could change as spring season begins in the Northern Hemisphere.
The DNPWC official said that regardless of the findings related to how the animal got to Urlabarli, the animal would have spent a significant amount of time with humans during its recovery phase. “That would mean that it would have gotten habituated with having humans around,” the official said.
Sending such animals back into the wild is a challenge, as they may have lost their hunting and other adaptation skills, he added. In May last year, officials at the Chitwan National Park released two rescued rhino calves into the wild, with limited success. The safety of the animals, which had gotten used to having humans around, was compromised as poachers could easily approach and kill them. Eventually, they were transferred to an enclosure in eastern Nepal away from human intervention.
Veteran conservationist Professor Karan Bahadur Shah said that rewilding the snow leopard would be a daunting task, as the animals are territorial. “If we just leave the animal in its natural habitat, it will get killed by other snow leopards defending their territory,” he said. “The best option would be to keep the animal in the zoo for the public to see.”
But Nepal’s Central Zoo has its own set of problems. The facility, established in 1932 as a private collection, has limited space and has frequently run into financial trouble. Conservationists say the snow leopard would need special facilities to cater to its needs.
“If the government decides that the snow leopard needs to remain at the zoo, we are ready to shoulder the responsibility,” said Adhikari. “We have set up special facilities for animals such as the red panda and chimpanzees,” he said. “We can do that for the snow leopard as well.”
Those advocating for keeping the animal in the zoo also said that Nepal is a snow leopard range country and the public, especially the young generation, also needs to see the different animals found in the country. “It has great educational value,” said Shah.
Snow leopard expert Suryawanshi from neighbouring India also said that it would be challenging to release the animal into the wild. 
“If the team at the zoo can establish the exact cause of this behaviour [why it ventured into the plains] and can keep the animal away from human contact, then it might be okay to release it back,” he said. “But otherwise, there is little hope for it in the wild. Better to let it live in the zoo.”
Back at the zoo, after the photojournalists are done taking photos, it is the turn of the reporters to point their smartphones at the animal. Then there is a contingent of senior wildlife department officials waiting in line to catch a glimpse of the animal. 
“So much for keeping it away from human contact,” a conservationist observing the hullabaloo from a distance said.

This story first appeared on Mongabay and Onlinekhabar is republishing it under a Creative Commons licence.
The National Assembly was formed to give experienced people a chance to be part of the parliament and help during the formation of important bills. In countries that follow the Westminster model of government, the upper house plays an important role. That, however, is not the case in Nepal as the country’s upper house has become a platform where individuals secure positions in the National Assembly based on their connections. As the election nears, many once again question the relevance and existence of the upper house.
Things were different in the past as the initial years of the National Assembly saw experienced politicians and experts others in their field be nominated for the post. That slowly changed as the first batch completed its two-year term.
“I understand why people are frustrated with the upper house. People expected experts but all we got was party cadres who lacked knowledge or experience,” says Bimala Rai Paudyal a National Assembly member. “Considering such behaviour and practices, what distinguishes the House of Representatives from the National Assembly?”
A loser’s second chance 
Narayan Kaji Shrestha, who faced defeat in the 2017 general election from Gorkha-2, was elected as a member of the National Assembly on January 23, 2020. Elected from Gandaki Province, Shrestha currently is the Deputy Prime Minister and Home Minister of the country.
Bhagwati Neupane who lost the election from Gandaki province and Bimala Ghimire who lost the election for mayorship in Bhanu Municipality also shared the same trajectory.
Similarly, Mrigendra Kumar Singh Yadav and Jag Prasad Sharma were defeated in the House of Representatives elections, from Saptari-4 and Dang-3 respectively are now members of the National Assembly. Bam Dev Gautam, who lost the elections from Bardiya, secured a place in the upper house through nomination by President Bidya Devi Bhandari.
Even those who did not win as ward member(s) got the opportunity to become members of the National Assembly including Sindh Bahadur Bishwakarma who was appointed on February 7, 2018. He is soon leaving his post on March 3.
Despite the repeated criticisms, the political parties have not paid attention to this concern posed by political leaders and the general public. The latest proof of this is the list of candidates for the National Assembly elections scheduled on January 25. The list contains names like Krishna Prasad Sitaula, defeated in the House of Representatives elections in 2022 from Koshi Province, and Pooja Chaudhary, who lost in the provincial assembly elections 2022 from Rautahat-3 (a).
Speaker Ganesh Prasad Timilsina, who led the National Assembly for the entire six years under the federal system, is also dissatisfied with the individuals who have made it to the upper house. 
“The allegations are something for the parties to ponder upon. The leaders should have prioritised involving intellectuals/neutrals rather than managing its members,” he says.
The 59-member National Assembly elects eight representatives, equally from all seven provinces, with an additional three individuals nominated by the President. The Constitution ensures representation of women, Dalits, minorities or disabled communities, envisioning that experts, experienced individuals, and the most qualified people from various fields will become members of the National Assembly.
Easy way in
File: A National Assembly meeting
There are some reasons why leaders aspire to join the upper house, and even the leadership create opportunities for them. 
In National Assembly elections, voters consist of local-level heads/deputy heads and provincial assembly members. Typically, individuals seeking these positions undergo a vetting process by their respective parties. As a result, aspiring members of parliament can focus less on persuading individual voters and more on gaining party support to secure their candidacy. 
Moreover, being a member of the National Assembly opens avenues to ministerial roles. The constitution prohibits a National Assembly member from becoming the Prime Minister, but not Deputy Prime Minister. Due to such opportunities, leaders are enticed to seek a position in the assembly.
The National Assembly is currently in its fourth election cycle since the promulgation of the Consitution in 2015. Scheduled for January 25, this election aims to fill 19 seats vacated by individuals completing their six-year terms. The previous election cycles took place in 2017, involving 56 members, followed by 2019 with 18 positions, and 2020 with 19 positions.
The cascading impacts
File: A National Assembly meeting
Another reason why the National Assembly is finding it difficult to justify itself is that it has become a shadow of the House of Representatives. The meeting of the National Assembly did not have one session when the House of Representatives was dissolved by then Prime Minister KP Sharma Oli twice. The demands and issues raised by the opposition parties in the House of Representatives automatically went to the National Assembly, where the parliamentarians of the ruling party put forward any proposal, they endorse it the same as in the House of Representatives.
The latest example – is the main opposition UML did not allow the meeting of the House of Representatives to continue for five days from July 5, 2023, due to a statement made by Prime Minister Pushpa Kamal Dahal during his visit to India. Consequently, the meeting of the National Assembly was also paused during that period.
The UML obstructed the House of Representatives for almost a month starting mid-July last year demanding a high-level inquiry committee to probe the 60-kilogram gold smuggling case and the resignation of the Home Minister. The National Assembly followed suit with leaders pushing their agendas forward.
Speaker Ganesh Timilsina himself is dissatisfied that every behaviour and activity of the House of Representatives influence the National Assembly. He says despite his attempts to prevent the overshadowing, it has been unfortunate that he did not garner the goodwill of the top leaders during political disputes.
Reinstating power
The National Assembly is a permanent institution. Therefore, it can remain operational even in the absence of the House of Representatives. Under normal circumstances, Speaker Timilsina initiated a positive practice by personally participating in different committees. Nevertheless, in the absence of the House of Representatives, the National Assembly often experienced inactivity.
In December 2020, the Prime Minister at that time, KP Sharma Oli, dissolved the House of Representatives. Subsequently, a session of the National Assembly was convened on January 1, 2021. Despite lasting only seven hours over four days, this session, which took place after the dissolution, failed to address crucial public issues. Even after six months, important matters remained unaddressed within the House.
On May 22, 2021, the UML-led government once again dissolved the House of Representatives. The meeting of the National Assembly and committees was affected once more. However, the dissolutions were declared unconstitutional by the Supreme Court, reinstating the parliament.
The Constitution says that despite the closing of the National Assembly session, thematic committee meetings can still take place. However, both the National Assembly and its committees remained inactive until the restoration of the House of Representatives.
According to Khimlal Devkota, a member of the National Assembly, when the House of Representatives was dissolved twice, it seemed that the National Assembly was also in a state of dissolution.
Bimala Rai Paudyal also believes that the inability to resume the upper house is a mark of weakness. 
“Since the government was not in a position to call, the President needed to be consulted by the chair together with the consultation committee. That was not done either,” she says.
Constitutional and legal distinctions

Except for the Constitution of Nepal (1962) and the Interim Constitution of Nepal (2007), all other constitutions in Nepal provided for a bicameral parliament with the National Assembly or the Upper House and the House of Representatives or the Lower House. The practices before 2015 were under the unitary governance system, but after the adoption of the federal democratic republican governance system, the role of the National Assembly has changed somewhat.
In the preamble of the constitution prepared by the ‘Constituent Assembly, and Administrative Organ Designation Committee’ during the drafting of the constitution, it is mentioned that some different qualifications have been prescribed for being a member of the House of Representatives and the National Assembly, with the intention that qualified people can be represented in the National Assembly.
Chair of the National Assembly Ganesh Prasad Timilsina restates that the members of the upper house should be assessed based on the country’s expectations with clear criteria. 
There is no definite definition of an expert in the constitution. It has been stated symbolically, “…It is expected that the members should have some basic skills to face the challenges and fulfil their responsibilities.”
According to the constitution, the responsibility of the National Assembly is to correctly establish the rights of the local level, state, and union, and to prevent the House of Representatives from trying to enact laws contrary to the spirit of federalism. There is an explanatory comment in the constitution about the propriety of the National Assembly – “This House is expected to fulfil its role to maintain creative and mutual relations between the national government and the provinces.”
In addition, there are some constitutional and legal differences regarding the National Assembly. But the MPs are demanding that it should cease. When a bill originating in the House of Representatives is passed and sent to the National Assembly, and if the latter does not decide within 60 days, it proceeds de facto.
This has placed the National Assembly in a dilemma. The Chairman of the National Assembly, Timilsina, says, “Such an arrangement should also apply to the House of Representatives, or both should be equal.”
Need for course correction 
PM Pushpa Kamal Dahal speaking in the National Assembly meeting.
Some instances have turned these so-called experts into a laughing stock due to their actions. 
On July 5, 2023,  a discussion on the Electronic Commerce (E-Commerce) Bill 2023 was tabled in the National Assembly. However, the parliamentarians misunderstood the main point and instead discussed the matter of electricity. The MPs, who had not read the proposal, suggested that electricity consumption within Nepal should also be increased besides exporting electricity to India and Bangladesh.
During the meeting, Ramesh Rijal, the Minister of Industry, Commerce and Supplies, also mentioned that India would purchase electricity during the Prime Minister’s visit. Unfortunately, the bill was unanimously approved.
Timilsina considers the incident an example, that in his six-year tenure, he does not want to remember. Som Bahadur Thapa, a former secretary at the Parliament Secretariat, termed the incident ‘a joke’ in the Parliament of Nepal. 
“This is strong proof of the kind of MPs we have, who speak without knowing what they are talking about.” 
Timilsina assumed the role of the speaker/chair of the National Assembly after the establishment of the Federal Democratic Republic. He had the opportunity to establish the system and the dignity of the National Assembly. However, instead of setting a positive example, he will soon be retiring after being accused of playing tricks with the Speaker and showing interest in the work of the House of Representatives.
Timilsina has repeatedly commented on the affairs of the House of Representatives. The latest instance was during a seminar on ‘Japan: Past, Present, and Future’ held in the capital on December 2, 2023, he publicly stated that the election results of the House of Representatives did not bode well.
Pointing to the emergence of a new party and the victory of some independent candidates, he said, “In a democracy, you get to choose candidates, irrespective of their party affiliation. However, is the signal positive?”
In August/ September 2022, Timilsina wrote a letter to the Election Commission, urging them to extend the tenure of Speaker and Deputy Speaker. Upon receiving a response stating that the Commission would not determine the tenure of the elected Parliament, Timilsina directed the Parliament Secretariat not to execute decisions made by the Management Committee after September 17, 2022.
This created conflict between the Speaker of the House of Representatives and the Speaker of the National Assembly and in the crux of this dispute between the parties, the country had to bear the consequences of this conflict. Laws could not be enacted promptly, and the place once considered the domain of experts was overshadowed by the party’s interest. 
A study conducted by the Democracy Resource Center Nepal (DRCN) on the legislative functioning of the National Assembly has revealed that the Upper House has passed some bills that go against the spirit of federalism.
The report’s concluding remarks say, “…the bills passed by the House of Representatives have not undergone significant changes or discussions in the National Assembly. The conclusion section of the study states that – “Furthermore, some bills, contradicting the spirit of federalism and addressing the interests of interest groups, have been approved by the National Assembly.”
Overall, in the last six years, parties have introduced individuals who, given their presentation level, have raised questions about the National Assembly’s justification. If there are no changes in the constitution, laws, and policies concerning the upper assembly, these concerns will persist.”
Representational image Photo by Tanushree Rao on Unsplash
While most of the nation was preparing for the festival of lights, Tihar in early November 2023, something no less exciting was fuelling our sparks from oceans away. A queer art festival was happening for the seventeenth year and we had a chance to attend it as delegates. Our delegation was made possible through the collaboration between the Outburst Arts, an art organisation based in Northern Ireland, UK and the British Council, Nepal.
There is a clear distinction between cities in terms of their flourishing arts scenes, and this became apparent during a visit to Belfast, Northern Ireland, specifically for the Outburst Queer Arts Festival held in the charming city centre. The organisation of such a festival requires months of careful preparation and planning.
The queer art festival started as short events lasting a few days. Now, after 17 years, it has grown into a ten-day festival with panel discussions, theatre performances, and exhibitions. Program guides were available at venues, partner hotels, local libraries, and shops. Many delegates, including us, came from outside Northern Ireland to attend.
During the queer art festival, we had the opportunity to connect with art curators, publishers, artists, and representatives from other British Council departments around the world (Lithuania, France, South Africa, Turkey, Greece, Jordan, England, and Argentina to name a few.) 
Each event that we attended gave us a different insight into what the arts can do and how it can facilitate connections. We gained insights from queer publishers and art curators on the challenges they face in their own countries due to resources and sometimes from bureaucracy in systems. We also got to see the way people can thrive when given a platform to showcase their works, such as an art exhibition in which the artist reimagined intimacy for queer people.
On the other hand, Nepal struggles by and large at times for queer visibility. There are no explicit spaces for SOGIESC (Sexual Orientation, Gender Identity and Expressions and Sex Characteristics) artists to showcase their works nor openly come together as a community, it all exists in pocket spaces. In the same way, something that struck us was the presence of older queer artists at the festival. 
It was not just for one particular event during the queer art festival. We noticed an active participation and involvement of older queer people throughout the festival there. It was fascinating to see queer artists in their 40s and 50s share their transformative and inspiring work. Whereas, back home, the queer folks at the forefront of queer art, advocacy and activism are mostly Gen-Zs and millennials. We have very few queer elders that we can count on our fingers who are diligently working for Nepali queer folks. Even among them, some still hold onto archaic notions and refuse to evolve and embrace changes. So, there’s that.
From dream to reality
During the queer art festival, we had the opportunity to connect with art curators, publishers and artists. Photo by Raphael Renter | @raphi_rawr on Unsplash
Before being selected as delegates, both of us joined online meetings with British Council Nepal and the Outburst representatives facilitated through Kaalo 101 (an art space in Patan), along with interested queer artists from Nepal. We had a total of three meetings where we discussed the possibilities and challenges of doing a queer art festival in Nepal. 
The discourse also entailed us sharing a presentation about the updates of the queer art scene in Nepal in the last five years. The updates included memorable leaps taken in queer arts from music to literature and fashion and more by artists from diverse walks of life. Days after the third meeting, the British Council extended invitations to us to attend the Outburst Queer Arts Festival.
Our delegation is just one example of the transcontinental collaboration because it was something that happened for the first time and involved us. But, Outburst Arts and the British Council have been practising cross-continental collaboration for years. Even in this year’s festival, we witnessed a lot of artists from different continents work together in exhibitions, lectures, panel discussions, magazines and so on. The amalgamation introduced us to brilliant thought-provoking work that defies gender and sociopolitical norms. The power of transcontinental collaboration was beyond beautiful.
Imagining queer arts in Nepal
Photo by Nikolas Gannon on Unsplash
The queer art scene in Nepal is an emerging one. While a full-fledged festival may not be possible now, something small yet significant is achievable. Time and again, different organisations have been running large art exhibitions/tours for weeks and months. However, in the microcosm that is Nepal, especially Kathmandu, the capital is no stranger to art-oriented programs. What it has been unfamiliar with precisely is queer art. And the unfamiliarity is not something induced by the lack of queer artists and their art. Sadly, it is because of inadequate platforms, space and resources to pursue queer arts.
Despite this, through the years there have been events and literature that have emerged centring on queer identity, but it has not come without its challenges. On collections of stories, “Pride Climbing Higher” and “Songs of Revolution” showcase stories from Nepalis across Nepal. There are not many stories reflecting the Nepali queer experiences otherwise. 
June Pride Parade by Queer Youth Group has gained momentum as well in the past few years since its conception, from a small gathering to now a large parade with performances from community members. The same can be said about Blue Diamond Society’s (BDS) Rainbow Visibility Pride events in August during the festival of Saa-Paru (Gai Jatra) which has been running for well over a decade; in recent years they have included flash mobs and interaction programmes as well in lead up to their parade. Individuals within the community have also organised their queer gatherings with friends, thus coming back to the cosmos of pocket spaces in celebrating queerness.
While artists like us are creative with what we want to put out, we still need organisations like the British Council to foster spaces and connections to enable us to do that. Then and again, artists have come together and collaborated on queer-centric projects. But, we need funding and resources to achieve bigger-scale projects that unite more artists and transcend borders.
Both of us advocate for queer rights and are involved in programs and activities that push the narrative further, extend the visibility of the community and normalise conversations surrounding queerness. Among other things, we are also the founders of Queering The Bond, a networking collective for Nepali queer folks and Shuby is also the founder of Queer Honky-Tonk, a platform to promote queer performances and networking with events such as a drag show or open mic every few months. However, both of us, individually or collaboratively can only do so much. 

The challenges of living in a capitalistic world oftentimes outweigh the passion we have for the queer art scene in Nepal. And this is where we expect the government and organisations to step up with policies, platforms and programs to provide spaces, opportunities and resources for queer artists. Here, the British Council joined hands with Outburst Arts, which paved the way for our delegation. We would not have known about the marvellous queer art festival at the other end of the world otherwise.
Besides the limitations brought by insufficient spaces and social unawareness, the centralised capital does hinder queer artists from outside the city to connect, create and collaborate. Art already is centralised and elitist. On top of that, the concentrated Kathmandu Valley is of no help when it comes to making art accessible beyond its borders.
Furthermore, there is also the expectation from basically everyone to have the perfect festival that caters to all people’s needs and wants. While the festival, if it should happen, is bound to be done with the right intentions, there is a lot of pressure for the first-time event itself. The festival will be inclusive and diverse. But, realistically speaking, it would be a struggle to make it relevant to each queer person from east to west.
Speaking of struggles, a visceral feeling of uneasiness swarmed over me with each step I took while exiting the airport after the flight back home. I, Birat, personally felt that I could not be as free or unrestrained in Nepal as I was during my time in Belfast. No wonder a lot of the queer people we know opt for abroad.
Seventeen years ago, when the Outburst Queer Arts Festival first began, it certainly was not as celebrated or large as it is now. What we are trying to convey here is that we do not have to start big. We can aim for something small yet promising. While there might be expectations to check all the boxes, it is crucial to be mindful of our capacity as well. But, we can be capacitated and this is where you – people in power, art enthusiasts, grant and resource allocators and media come in. It is time we all believe in Nepali queer art and create space for it to not only survive but thrive. It is imperative to understand that formulating our imagination into reality can only be possible through unwavering collaboration.
The month of January saw major road accidents in different parts of the country, including Lamhi in Dang, Dhorpatan in Baglung, and Chandragiri in Kathmandu. Road accidents have been common throughout the country with Nepal Police data suggesting over 2,500 people dying in them annually. Despite this, the Ministry of Finance has shown reluctance to introduce the proposed Road Safety Bill to reduce traffic accidents, fatalities, and serious injuries, and enhance road safety. 
Instead, the Finance Ministry has asked the Ministry of Physical Infrastructure and Transport to include the proposed bill in the Public Roads Act. Along with that, the government’s initiative to pass dedicated laws on road safety and set up a mechanism, including the empowered National Road Safety Council (NRSC), to decrease accidents, has come to a halt.
Keshav Kumar Sharma, secretary of the Ministry of Physical Infrastructure and Transport, says they asked for a dedicated road safety law that comprehensively addresses institutional arrangements was the need of the hour. This includes ensuring safety in road construction, promoting public awareness, providing training and communication facilities, implementing rescue mechanisms, and arranging rehabilitation for families affected by road accidents. However, the Ministry of Finance believes a separate law is unnecessary due to concerns about potential increased financial burden.
Hourly need

Officials from the Ministry of Physical Infrastructure allege that the Ministry of Finance is approaching sensitive matters, such as passenger safety, solely from an economic standpoint. They say that concerns related to road, vehicle, and passenger safety are being overshadowed, and there are indications that this approach will continue. 
“The government is avoiding addressing the sensitive issue of road accidents and the associated human and material costs, fearing an increase in expenses. This contradicts the government’s commitment and policy to reduce traffic accidents in the future,” says an official from the Ministry of Physical Infrastructure on the condition of anonymity.
According to the Ministry of Physical Infrastructure, the existing laws lack the vision and purpose necessary for developing a sustainable, safe, risk-free, and reliable transportation operation and security system. Therefore, the Ministry of Physical Infrastructure officials argue that a distinct law is essential to decrease road accidents and ensure the safety of pedestrians, including passenger transport workers and roadside residents, as well as pets, wild animals, and birds. 
“The Road Safety Act is the need of the hour as it will help us during post-accident rescue, treatment management, rehabilitation, and legal representation,” says the official.
Currently, there are gaps in enforcing road rules, monitoring vehicle capacities, ensuring road structure safety, managing traffic signs, and organizing road safety facilities. The implementation of the Road Safety Act is seen as crucial to address these issues.
However, there has not been a facilitative environment for providing education and raising awareness about road traffic safety, safety mechanisms, and coordinating among organisations related to road transport. The aspect of training drivers with skills and knowledge, as well as monitoring road safety on the roads, is also lacking. This is why experts have been suggesting introducing a separate road safety law to address these aspects.
The Finance Ministry, however, says that road safety should not be downplayed by ignoring human sensibilities related to road safety and citing economic reasons. Officials from the Ministry of Physical Infrastructure argue that incorporating safety considerations in the Road Act does not automatically result in a decrease in accidents or the integration of post-accident rescue, relief, and rehabilitation efforts.
“The existing laws do not address road safety anywhere. Due to its lack of clarity and inadequacy, it has not been implemented with due diligence. For instance, provisions such as those for vehicle inspectors outlined in the Transport Act have not been acted upon by the government,” says an official from the Transport Ministry.
Policies and commitments, but no laws

The Motor Vehicles and Transport Management Act (1993) includes several provisions related to vehicle registration, road permits, driver’s licenses, traffic management, insurance, and penalties. The Public Roads Act (1974) primarily focuses on road management. However, there is no provision in the Act regarding the National Road Safety Council.
In this situation, Nepal has developed a 10-year road safety action plan but is yet to enact corresponding legislation. Unfortunately, government agencies and mechanisms are not obligated to follow the action plan, as it lacks legal guidance.
Now, the Transport Ministry holds the view that if safety considerations are explicitly addressed in the Public Roads Act, the outcome will not differ from what the Finance Ministry has said. Given the Public Roads Act’s close association with the Department of Road, the ministry thinks greater emphasis will be placed on road construction. However, they argue that incorporating the road safety aspect into the Act would not be effective.
Secretary Sharma of the Transport Ministry is tasked with ensuring road safety, overseeing physical infrastructure and transport, and coordinating efforts across education, health, home, law, federal affairs, and general administration ministries. This responsibility extends to provincial ministries, local levels, as well as various agencies, organisations, security agencies, non-governmental organisations, and related entities, each with their specific roles.
“As all the agencies need to be allocated responsibilities for various aspects of road safety, we have requested them to collaborate in formulating a distinct law. This should encompass the reduction of all types of accidents,” said Sharma.
The ministry believes that a dedicated law addressing road safety is crucial to mitigate severe road accidents in Nepal and to uphold the commitments made by the country on the international stage.
Nepal has committed to implementing the Stockholm Declaration through the Global Road Traffic Safety Conference in 2020, as per the United Nations Sustainable Development Goals. Nepal, which has incorporated sustainable development goals into its national development plan, has not yet commenced work aligned with these objectives.

Nevertheless, Nepal’s neighbouring countries are already addressing road safety through legal frameworks. Various states in India have enacted road safety laws, and the effectiveness of these laws is contributing to a 50 per cent reduction in road accidents.
In 1999, Bhutan also introduced a unified road safety and transport act. Pakistan, on the other hand, issued the National Highway Safety Ordinance-2000 to ensure road safety, distinct from its National Highway Authority Act (1991). Britain, Australia, America, New Zealand, and other countries have established separate road safety laws as well.
Road safety neglected
In Nepal, road safety has been consistently neglected due to the absence of dedicated legislation. Road safety expert Keshav Adhikari says that the government primarily focused on road construction, overlooks crucial aspects such as road safety and reinforcement. Consequently, roads are transforming into perilous pathways for both vehicles and passengers.
“There is a lack of interest in formulating policies and laws aimed at mitigating financial losses resulting from accidents,” says Adhikari.
He further points out that safety is not a governmental priority, as expanding the road network is perceived to yield more political benefits than implementing additional structures to enhance road safety.
“When I worked as an expert in the Transport Ministry for over a year, I realised that promoting road safety is not a government priority,” he says. “Annually, more people die due to road accidents than those who die in natural disasters, but the government has not given it much attention.”
Even though the prime minister, ministers, and MPs keep asserting that roads have been constructed, no one seems to be addressing the critical issues of road safety and quality.
Saroj Sitaula, General Secretary of the Federation of Nepalese National Transport Entrepreneurs (FNNTE), says that the government must be attentive as accidents are on the rise due to various technical and human factors, including road infrastructure. 
“Many accidents can be mitigated by improving road conditions, installing barriers on the sides, putting up informational boards, and ensuring scientific and practical road markings,” he says. “We need to formulate a plan and progress accordingly.”
Sitaula argues that the government should establish policies to create mechanisms for emergency rescue, treatment, and rehabilitation after an accident occurs. He emphasises the importance of enhancing road infrastructure, conducting a scientific examination of the technical condition of vehicles, and ensuring compliance with the law by drivers, passengers, and regulators. He says that blaming drivers and transport entrepreneurs for accidents is inadequate, and the government must fulfil its responsibilities.
Roads are unsafe

Nepal currently boasts a road network spanning approximately 100,000 km, with the majority consisting of dirt and gravel roads. Among the more than 22,000 kilometres of national and subsidiary highways, numerous sections remain unpaved.
Despite the government’s substantial investment in road construction and expansion, minimal efforts are allocated to ensuring road safety. 
Recently, all three levels of government have accelerated the widening of roads, incorporating asphalt and slopes. However, it appears that issues concerning road quality and safety are escalating at a faster pace. Roads that have been neglected in the guise of maintenance have become a nightmare for the public.
Infrastructure expert Suryaraj Acharya notes that these problems arise due to the tendency to construct roads only after they have sustained damage, without considering potential issues during the initial construction phase.
Photo by Susan Mohr on Unsplash
When beginners choose an instrument to play, they often struggle to decide which music store to buy from. Since musical instrument usually requires a good investment, one must be careful about where they are buying the instruments from. 
With hundreds of music stores spread throughout the city, selecting the right one for your musical instrument can be a daunting task. However, there are some stores in the valley that offer genuine products and a variety of musical accessories to meet your needs.
These stores, not only sell musical instruments but also various other accessories that are necessary for these instruments. Most even provide repair and maintenance, which is another important thing one should consider before selecting a store to buy an instrument from. This service is of paramount importance that you choose a store that offers a repair and servicing facility as you will not have issues if your instrument has a problem in the future.
Deep Music 
Photo: Facebook/ Deep Music 
Deep Music of Khichapokhari, is one of the oldest music stores in Nepal, which has been delivering services since 2001. Deep Music deals with brands like GHS, Ditson, Marshall, Flanger, Proline Hi-Link and others. 
Besides selling various musical products, Deep Music also provides the service of repairing and maintenance of musical instruments and gears. 
Guitar Shop 
Photo: Facebook/Guitar Shop 
Guitar Shop is the largest musical chain in Nepal. It has 11 outlets throughout the country. Outside the Kathmandu valley, this store has its outlets in  Dharan, Chitwan, Pokhara and Butwal. The head office of Guitar Shop is in Nayabazar, Kathmandu. 
In Guitar Shop, you can buy guitars, guitar accessories, keyboards, audio electronics and many more.   
Harmonium Musicals Store 
Photo: Facebook/Harmonium Musicals Store 
Harmonium Musicals Store Of Khichapokhari is believed to be the first music store in Nepal, which has been running since 1964. At Harmonium Musicals Store, we can find the musical instruments and gears of Boss, Roland, Takamine, Pearl, ESP, Oranger and others. 
Music Point 
Located in Jyatha, Music Point is another popular music store where all kinds of musical goods are available. The store also has a facility for instrument maintenance and repair. 
Moreover, Music Point also provides delivery service of instruments and accessories throughout Nepal. 
Planet Music Store 
Photo: Facebook/Planet Music Store 
Planet Music Store has two outlets based in Shankhamul and Naya Thimi.  Planet Music is an authorised dealer of Bacchus, CF Insulation, CZ Inspire, Headway Guitars and others. 
Besides, Planet Music Store also does the work of repairing and maintenance of instruments and gears. This store also trades second-hand instruments.  
Treasure Music Store 
Located in Shantinagar, Treasure Music Store is an authorised dealer of brands like Manaslu, Native Instruments, Laney, Alctron, Beyerdynamic, Hex Instruments, MXL Mics and Stagg Music for Nepal. Likewise,  Treasure Music Store also has the availability of products of Daddario, Presonus, Behringer, KRK, Casio, Roland, Focusrite, Shure, Akai, and others. 
Treasure Music Store offers various musical instruments and accessories including DJ equipment, live sound and PA systems, studio record equipment and others.
Realme 12 Pro+ 5G. Photo: Realme India
Realme has launched its popular mid-range number series smartphone, the Realme 12 Pro series. The series includes the Realme 12 Pro 5G and the Realme 12 Pro+ 5G which are the successors of the Realme 11 Pro+ 5G and Realme 11 Pro 5G respectively. The Realme 11 series was widely appreciated for its design and performance at the price range. 
The 12 series has stepped up the game with an even better design. Realme has not only changed the design but has also upgraded the performance and the camera to compete in the mid-range price market. Realme recently has been focusing a lot on the design aspect and the price range performance. 
The 12 Pro+ has some major differences from last year’s 11 Pro+ which include design, IP rating, chipset, camera and charging. 
Let us see what the luxuriously designed smartphone delivers in terms of specs.
Specifications of Realme 12 Pro+ 5G
DimensionsLength: 161.47mmWidth: 74.02mmDepth: 8.75mmWeight196 gramsDisplay typeAMOLEDDisplay size6.7-inchResolution2,412 x 1,080 (FHD+)Refresh rateUp to 120HzIP ratingIP65 dust and water resistance Glass Protection0.55mm Double-Reinforced GlassChipsetSnapdragon 7s Gen 2 (4nm)CPUOcta-core (4×2.40 GHz Cortex-A78 & 4×1.95 GHz Cortex-A55)GPUAdreno 710OSRealme UI 5.0 based on Android 14RAM8GB | 12GBStorage128GB | 256GBRear camera 50MP Sony IMX890 main camera8MP ultra-wide camera64MP periscope portrait cameraSelfie camera32MP Wi-Fi802.11 a/b/g/n/ac/ax（Wi-Fi 6）Bluetooth5.2NetworkLTE | 5GSIMDual Nano SIMAudioDual SpeakersSupports Dolby AtmosDual-mic Noise CancellationHi-Res Audio CertificationSensorsGeomagnetic sensor, Proximity sensor, Light sensor, Acceleration sensor, Gyroscope, In-display fingerprint sensorBattery5,000mAh (typ)Charging67W SUPERVOOC wired fast chargingPorts and Buttons2 Nano SIM Card SlotsType-C PortPower ButtonVolume ButtonsColoursSubmarine BlueNavigator BeigeExplorer RedPrice (expected)Rs 50,000 (8/128GB)Rs 54,000 (8/256GB)Rs 60,000 (12/256GB)
Design and Display
The Realme 12 Pro+ and the Realme 12 Pro share the same design and dimensions. The design is fascinating. Realme patterned up with Luxury Swiss Watch designer Ollivier Savéo to craftfully design the smartphone. 
All the colour options have a vegan leather back. Since the phone is designed by a luxury watch designer, it comes with a big round camera module housing the triple camera setup. There is a golden 3D Jubilee Bracelet which gives the texture of a luxury watch strap. A golden patterned line runs through the middle and around the camera module for an even better look.
Realme 12 Pro+ 5G designer Ollivier Savéo. Photo: Realme India
The back curves to the plastic frame which has a metal-like shiny finish. On the front, the 12 Pro+ 5G has a curved screen with a centred hole-punch cutout which houses the selfie camera. The bezels are minimal with the sides being curved almost zero while the top and the chin have a slight ear-like bezel. 
Photo: Realme India
The Realme 12 Pro+ 5G has a stunning 6.7-inch curved Vision Display, delivering vibrant visuals with an FHD+ resolution of 2,412 x 1,080. It has a screen-to-body ratio of 93 per cent which gives an immersive viewing experience. It has smooth scrolling and responsiveness with a refresh rate of up to 120Hz and a touch sampling rate of up to 240Hz. The display offers a contrast ratio of 5,000,000:1 and a peak brightness level of 900 nits. It has a wide colour gamut of 100 per cent DCI-P3 and 1.07 billion colours for a vibrant look. 
Photo: Realme India
As for the protection, it has 0.55mm Double-Reinforced Glass and IP65 dust and water resistance. 
Photo: Realme India
Performance and Storage
The performance has also been stepped up with the change from MediaTek Chipset in the 11 Pro series to Snapdragon chipsets in the 12 Pro series. The Realme 12 Pro+ 5G is powered by the Snapdragon 7s Gen 2 chipset built on a 4nm processor. It has an octa-core CPU, which includes Cortex-A78 and Cortex-A55 cores for seamless multitasking and responsiveness. The Adreno 710 GPU handles the graphics for gaming and multimedia. 
Photo: Realme India
It runs on the Realme UI 5.0 based on Android 14. The overall software experience is good but Realme gets back to the cost-cutting techniques in the software part with a bunch load of pre-installed hot apps and hot games. It also has a 3D VC liquid cooling system which spans 3394mm² and covers the main heat sources of the motherboard giving a boost in heat dissipation efficiency.
Photo: Realme India
The Realme 12 Pro+ 5G is available in two RAM options which include 8GB and 12GB. The 8GB RAM is paired with 128GB and 256GB storage options while the 12GB RAM is paired with 256GB of storage. It also has a Dynamic RAM feature which helps to increase the RAM size up to 24GB using the internal storage.
Photo: Realme India
Camera
The camera on the Realme 12 Pro+ 5G is also interesting. Here, Realme has partnered up with Chilean cinematographer Claudio Miranda. He has worked in films such as Life of Pi, Top Gun: Maverick, The Curious Case of Benjamin Button and Tron: Legacy. He has also won an Academy Award for Best Cinematography for his role in Life of Pi in 2013. 
Claudio Miranda has worked with Realme for fine-tuning images. There are also three film filters made in collaboration with Claudio Miranda with unique colour grading matched with a 2.39:1 aspect ratio and cinematic-level bokeh adjustment. The filters are Journey, Maverick and Memory. 
Photo: Realme India
The Realme 12 Pro+ 5G has a triple camera setup at the rear. The main camera features a 50MP Sony IMX890 sensor with OIS for steady and stable shots. It has a resolution of 4,096 x 3,072 and an aperture of f/1.8, while the 24mm equivalent focal length provides a wide field of view (FOV) of 84°.
Photo: Realme India
Instead of using a macro camera or a depth sensor, Realme has stepped the game with a 64MP periscope portrait camera with an OmniVision OV64B sensor. It delivers a resolution of 4,624 x 3,472 and supports OIS for steady telephoto shots. With an aperture of f/2.8 and a focal length equivalent to 71mm, it delivers impressive portrait shots with a narrow FOV of 33° and 3x optical zoom. The last camera is an 8MP ultra-wide camera, providing a wide range of view with a focal length equivalent to 16mm and an aperture of f/2.2 and FOV of 112°.
Photo: Realme India
The rear camera has a lot of photography features including Auto-zoom, street photography mode, moon mode, starry mode pro, super nightscape, pano, professional mode, portrait mode, HDR, AI scene recognition, AI beauty, filters, text scanner, portrait distortion correction, one take and a super group portrait.
Photo: Realme India
As for video shooting, the rear camera of the Realme 12 Pro+ 5G can shoot 4K videos at 30fps, 1080p and 720p videos at both 30fps and 60fps. It can also record slow-motion videos at 1080p and 720p at 120fps. The videography features of the smartphone include slow motion, time-lapse, cinema mode, AI video tracking, Starry time-lapse video and tilt-shift time-lapse video. 
Photo: Realme India
The front camera of the Realme 12 Pro+ 5G has a 32MP sensor which clicks decent selfies and videos. The front camera also has features such as Portrait mode, pano, ultra-wide angle, AI beauty mode, face recognition, filters, super nightscape and AI scene recognition. It can record 1080p and 720p videos at 30fps. 
Battery and Charging
The Realme 12 Pro+ 5G is equipped with a 5,000mAh battery which supports 67W SUPERVOOC wired fast charging. For connectivity, it features Wi-Fi 6 support for fast wireless networking, along with Bluetooth 5.2 for seamless pairing with other devices. It offers both LTE and 5G network compatibility for high-speed mobile data. With dual nano SIM slots, users can easily manage multiple phone numbers. 
Photo: Realme India
Audio features include dual speakers with Dolby Atmos support, providing immersive sound quality. Dual-mic noise cancellation ensures clear audio during calls, while Hi-Res Audio certification enhances music playback. A range of sensors including a geomagnetic sensor, proximity sensor, light sensor, acceleration sensor, gyroscope and in-display fingerprint sensor.
Photo: Realme India
The Realme 12 Pro+ 5G is available in three colour options, Submarine Blue, Navigator Beige and Explorer Red.
Photo: Realme India
The Realme 12 Pro+ 5G is expected to cost around Rs 50,000 for the 8GB/128GB variant, Rs 54,000 for the 8/256GB variant and Rs 60,000 for the 12GB/256GB variant in Nepal.
Ram Bujhaun Yadav with his land ownership certificate stands near a border pillar which he says was erroneously placed on his land. 
In October 2023, when 51-year-old Ram Bujhaun Yadav of Musaharnia Rural Municipality-5, Mukhiyapatti, Dhanusha, was at a relative’s house, someone told him that two Indian Sashastra Seema Bal (SSB) personnel were looking for him.
Anxious, he rushed home wondering why they were looking for him.
“They asked me if the paddy field in the no man’s land was mine. I told them yes and they asked me to cut down the paddy immediately,” he said.
The paddy was not ripe and Yadav asked them for some time. However, the SSB personnel told him he had to cut down his paddy immediately.
Ram Bujhaun and his wife Tetari Devi each own a 677-square-metre plot of land. As Nepal and India reevaluated the border, Ram Bujhan’s land was been deemed to be near the no man’s land as it now has two demarcation pillars.
Frustrated, Ram Bujhaun cut the paddy before it was due to be harvested. Now, he has been asked to not plant anything on the land as it falls in the no man’s land.
“Our border police don’t say a word. I can’t fight the SSB on my own,” says Ram Bujhaun adding he had decided not to plan anything on the land anymore.
Woes of the farmers
Many farmers in southern Nepal say their land has now been placed in India after the recent demarcation. 
When the Jamuna River, which flows through the no man’s land between Nepal and India, changed its course some two decades ago, some border pillars went missing. Locals say these pillars have now been placed encroaching on Nepali land.
In 2018, with the then Chief District Officer of Dhanusha, Pradeep Raj Kandel, and an official from Madhubani district, Bihar, India, a team that included border security forces from both countries, the Armed Police Force of Nepal, and SSB of India began placing border pillars after land measurement by technicians.
Locals have raised concerns, stating that border pillars have been positioned, encroaching approximately 50 to 100 meters of land into Nepal compared to the previous position. Many like Ram Bujhaun are unaware of when these border pillars were placed.
“I did not know that pillar was placed here. After I found out when I asked the village leaders, many said they were placing the border pillars as they pleased,” said Ram Bujhaun.
He was told to carry on planting paddy and that it would not matter as these issues had happened in the past. 
“They encroached on my land and have asked me not to plant anything. This is gross injustice,” he says.
Ram Bujhaun’s family owns a total of 4,000 square metres of land, with 2,000 square metres belonging to him and the remaining 2,000 square metres to his brother Bechan. However, 1,000 square metres of his land is now located on the Indian side after the demarcation. Despite this, he has been farming on the land and continues to pay taxes to the Department of Land Management and Archive in Nepal.
“They have marked my land to be on the Indian side and placed border pillars on it. I’ve been farming till now but I don’t know when they will ask me to stop,” he says.
Ignorance of the government
The Madhesh province in southern Nepal
The former ward chair of Mukhiyapatti Musharniya Rural Municipality-5, Ram Naresh Yadav, said that over time, India has encroached on numerous Nepali lands in various locations in the Madhesh Province. This, he says, happened due to the Nepali administration’s ignorance and weak stature.
“They (Nepali administration) were careless and that meant the Indian side placed these border pillars by encroaching on Nepali land,” says Ram Naresh.
He said that over 40 farmers from wards 1, 5, and 6 have land ranging from 300 to 1,600 square metres on the Indian side. 
“These farmers have land ownership certificates, but they cannot farm as the SSB says the land is in India and not Nepal,” said Ram Naresh.
In 1996, land ownership certificates were distributed after surveying the land in the border area. Local Dharmendra Kumar Yadav said that since then, the locals have been paying their land tax regularly. In 2018, when the pillar was being placed, the locals protested when they saw their land was being encroached on. However, since the demarcation had been agreed upon by high-ranking government officials of Nepal and India, the farmer’s voices went unheard.
“We tried to stop when the border pillars were being placed on our land. But the administrators from both sides forcibly put it there without even trying to hold a discussion,” said Harish Chandra Yadav. 
The Chief District Officer of Dhanusha, Chakrapani Pandey, says that the border pillars were placed by the technical team after the measurements and with the agreement of the high-ranking officials of the two countries.
“The fields and houses that are built in no man’s land have recently been cleared. No one can do anything in this particular area,” said Pandey. “We understand the people’s concern but we cannot do anything about it now.”
Photo by pippen on Unsplash
Life is filled with surprises and unexpected events and it can change at any moment. The only thing certain in life is the uncertainty. Change is a natural and inevitable part of our lives, and it may be positive as well as negative.
Even though it is not guaranteed that we will wake up in the morning, we set the alarm every night with the hope that we will wake up in the morning. We do not know what each day is going to bring us, but we may have varieties, adventures, and endless opportunities.
The push to explore
The uncertainty sometimes forces us to explore those aspects of life, we never knew existed or needed. It also tests the mental strength of people and how they deal with it. The uncertainty has taught me to be grateful, as we never know what life throws at us.
In life, everything does not go according to our plans, and if we do not embrace the change we will face huge trouble. The Covid-19 pandemic is the best example of uncertainty, we were constantly fearing death and it was uncertain that we would see the sunrise the next day.
It is not certain that every decision in life will be correct, but if you fear not trying at all, you miss endless opportunities for learning and growing. When our decisions or outcomes are on the negative side, we get depressed and we might tend to think about committing suicide, but we forget that if we have life we have endless opportunities. 
Most of us plan for our careers, our love life, etc. and when those plans do not work out we start getting uncomfortable. But if we can deal with today, we can surely deal with tomorrow. We need to cherish little moments in our lives and know that nothing is permanent not even the failures and setbacks.
We come here with nothing and leave with nothing. So why should we hold the egos and grudges against each other? Instead of making our life meaningful and enjoying the journey of life, we get into puzzles of accumulating wealth and we go against our own loved ones for it. 
Change is certain
Photo by Kathyryn Tripp on Unsplash
Nothing is permanent in life, everything can change in fractions of seconds. In today’s society, everyone is so busy, that we people have so less time for our loved ones. What I have learned over the years, is to find time in our busy schedule for our family because we never know when it will be our last day together with them. 
Yes! Death is a natural process, so if you have to die someday, why should you die with grudges in your heart? But instead of worrying about the inevitable, focusing on the things you can control will bring a lot of happiness in life.
Uncertainty is not only a negative thing; it also brings a lot of opportunity because you dare to change. The life-changing experience will not come knocking down your door, you need to expose yourself. We learn by doing and experimenting, even though we might fail. But that is not the end of the world. I still remember hesitating while applying for the role of leadership, at my school level as it was not certain that I would be chosen.
Even after being selected, I was uncertain about whether I could fulfil my responsibilities or not. But that uncertainty helped me grow out of my comfort zone and give my best input. If I had not applied for that role just because I was uncertain of the outcome, I would miss the biggest learning opportunity in my school life. So, do not let the uncertainty or the unknown ever stop you from trying and no matter how much we try, to plan life always finds a way to surprise us. 
It is important to stay grounded when we have everything we wish for because life can take such a turn that we had never expected in our wildest dreams. Similarly, nothing is permanent in life, the financial hardships, the grades, the breakups, etc. But the most important thing is not to lose hope during those difficult times.
According to the data provided by Nepal police, around 6,830 people took their lives in the fiscal year 2022/23. There is nothing in life that cannot be resolved although it may take time, committing suicide should not be an option. It’s important to share feelings among family members or loved ones because together as a family any problem can be overcome.
Embrace the unknown and focus on enhancing your life, instead of worrying about what will happen next. Always find time for your loved ones, as life is uncertain. We should be grateful that we are alive and accept that change is the only constant thing in life. Do not let the unknown, stop you from trying or achieving your goals and always remember that even if you fail, you still have endless opportunities.
